# INTERNATIONAL STANDARD ISO/IEC 19757-3

**Third edition** &nbsp;&nbsp; **2020-06**

## Information technology — Document Schema Definition Languages (DSDL) —

### Part 3:\
Rule-based validation using Schematron

*Technologies de l'information — Langages de définition de schéma de documents (DSDL) —*\
*Partie 3: Validation basée sur des règles à l'aide de Schematron*

---

Reference number: **ISO/IEC 19757-3:2020(E)**

© ISO/IEC 2020

## COPYRIGHT PROTECTED DOCUMENT

© ISO/IEC 2020

All rights reserved. Unless otherwise specified, or required in the context of its implementation, no part of this publication may be reproduced or utilized otherwise in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, or posting on the internet or an intranet, without prior written permission. Permission can be requested from either ISO at the address below or ISO's member body in the country of the requester.

> ISO copyright office\
> CP 401 • Ch. de Blandonnet 8\
> CH-1214 Vernier, Geneva\
> Phone: +41 22 749 01 11\
> Fax: +41 22 749 09 47\
> Email: copyright@iso.org\
> Website: www.iso.org

Published in Switzerland

## Contents

- *Foreword* … v
- *Introduction* … vi
- **1** Scope … 1
- **2** Normative references … 1
- **3** Terms and definitions … 1
- **4** Notation … 4
- **5** Syntax … 4
  - **5.1** Well-formedness … 4
  - **5.2** Namespace … 4
  - **5.3** Whitespace … 4
  - **5.4** Core elements … 4
    - **5.4.1** General … 4
    - **5.4.2** active element … 4
    - **5.4.3** assert element … 4
    - **5.4.4** extends element … 5
    - **5.4.5** include element … 5
    - **5.4.6** let element … 5
    - **5.4.7** name element … 5
    - **5.4.8** ns element … 6
    - **5.4.9** param element … 6
    - **5.4.10** pattern element … 6
    - **5.4.11** phase element … 6
    - **5.4.12** report element … 6
    - **5.4.13** rule element … 7
    - **5.4.14** schema element … 7
    - **5.4.15** value-of element … 7
  - **5.5** Ancillary elements and attributes … 8
    - **5.5.1** diagnostic element … 8
    - **5.5.2** diagnostics element … 8
    - **5.5.3** dir element … 8
    - **5.5.4** emph element … 8
    - **5.5.5** flag attribute … 8
    - **5.5.6** fpi attribute … 8
    - **5.5.7** icon attribute … 8
    - **5.5.8** p element … 8
    - **5.5.9** properties element … 8
    - **5.5.10** property element … 8
    - **5.5.11** role attribute … 9
    - **5.5.12** see attribute … 9
    - **5.5.13** span element … 9
    - **5.5.14** subject attribute … 9
    - **5.5.15** title element … 9
- **6** Semantics … 9
  - **6.1** Validation function … 9
  - **6.2** Minimal syntax (informative) … 10
  - **6.3** Abstract pattern processing … 11
  - **6.4** Query language binding … 12
  - **6.5** Order and side-effects … 13
- **7** Conformance … 13
  - **7.1** Simple conformance … 13
  - **7.2** Full conformance … 14
- *Annex A (normative) RELAX NG schema for Schematron* … 15
- *Annex B (normative) Schematron schema for additional constraints* … 19
- *Annex C (normative) Default query language binding* … 20
- *Annex D (informative) Schematron Validation Report Language* … 21
- *Annex E (informative) Design requirements* … 26
- *Annex F (informative) Use of Schematron as a vocabulary* … 27
- *Annex G (informative) Use of Schematron for multi-lingual schemas* … 28
- *Annex H (normative) Query language binding for XSLT2* … 29
- *Annex I (normative) Query language binding for XPath2* … 31
- *Annex J (normative) Query language binding for XSLT3* … 32
- *Annex K (normative) Query language binding for XPath3* … 34
- *Annex L (informative) Query language binding for EXSLT* … 35
- *Annex M (informative) Query language binding for STX* … 36
- *Annex N (informative) Example usage of Schematron properties* … 37
- *Bibliography* … 39

## Foreword

ISO (the International Organization for Standardization) is a worldwide federation of national standards
bodies (ISO member bodies). The work of preparing International Standards is normally carried out
through ISO technical committees. Each member body interested in a subject for which a technical
committee has been established has the right to be represented on that committee. International
organizations, governmental and non-governmental, in liaison with ISO, also take part in the work.
ISO collaborates closely with the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) on all matters of
electrotechnical standardization.
The procedures used to develop this document and those intended for its further maintenance are
described in the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 1. In particular, the different approval criteria needed for the
different types of ISO documents should be noted. This document was drafted in accordance with the
editorial rules of the ISO/IEC Directives, Part 2 (see www.iso.org/directives).
Attention is drawn to the possibility that some of the elements of this document may be the subject of
patent rights. ISO shall not be held responsible for identifying any or all such patent rights. Details of
any patent rights identified during the development of the document will be in the Introduction and/or
on the ISO list of patent declarations received (see www.iso.org/patents).
Any trade name used in this document is information given for the convenience of users and does not
constitute an endorsement.

For an explanation of the voluntary nature of standards, the meaning of ISO specific terms and
expressions related to conformity assessment, as well as information about ISO's adherence to the
World Trade Organization (WTO) principles in the Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) see www.iso.org/
iso/foreword.html.
This document was prepared by Joint Technical Committee ISO/IEC JTC 1, Information technology,
Subcommittee SC 34, Document description and processing languages.
This third edition cancels and replaces the second edition (ISO/IEC 19757-3:2016), which has been
technically revised.
The main changes compared to the previous edition are as follows:
— query language bindings have been added for XSLT 3.0 (Annex J) and XPath 3.0 (Annex K);
— annexes pertaining to XPath and XSLT query language bindings (Annexes H to K) are now all
  normative, while those for EXSLT (Annex L) and STX (Annex M) remain informative.
A list of all parts in the ISO/IEC 19757 series can be found on the ISO website.
Any feedback or questions on this document should be directed to the user’s national standards body. A
complete listing of these bodies can be found at www.iso.org/members.html.

## Introduction

ISO/IEC 19757 (all parts) defines a set of Document Schema Definition Languages (DSDL) that can
be used to specify one or more validation processes performed against Extensible Markup Language
(XML) or Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML) documents. [XML is an application profile
SGML (see ISO 8879).]
A document model is an expression of the constraints to be placed on the structure and content of
documents to be validated with the model. A number of technologies have been developed through
various formal and informal consortia since the development of Document Type Definitions (DTDs)
as part of ISO 8879, notably by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) and the Organization for the
Advancement of Structured Information Standards (OASIS). A number of validation technologies are
standardized in DSDL to complement those already available as standards or from the industry.
Through the validation that a structured document conforms to specified constraints in structure and
content, the potentially many applications acting on the document are relieved from duplicating the
task of confirming that such requirements have been met. Historically, such tasks and expressions have
been developed and utilized in isolation, without consideration of how the features and functionality
available in other technologies can enhance validation objectives.
The main objective of ISO/IEC 19757 (all parts) is to bring together different validation-related tasks
and expressions to form a single extensible framework that allows technologies to work in series or

in parallel to produce a single or a set of validation results. The extensibility of DSDL accommodates
validation technologies not yet designed or specified.
In the past, different design and use criteria have led users to choose different validation technologies
for different portions of their information. Bringing together information within a single XML
document sometimes prevents existing document models from being used to validate sections of data.
By providing an integrated suite of constraint description languages that can be applied to different
subsets of a single XML document, ISO/IEC 19757 (all parts) allows different validation technologies to
be integrated under a well-defined validation policy.
The structure of this document is as follows. Clause 5 describes the syntax of an ISO Schematron
schema. Clause 6 describes the semantics of a correct ISO Schematron schema; the semantics specify
when a document is valid with respect to an ISO Schematron schema. Clause 7 describes conformance
requirements for implementations of ISO Schematron validators. Annex A provides the ISO/IEC 19757-2
(RELAX NG) schema for ISO Schematron. Annex B provides the ISO Schematron schema for constraints
in ISO Schematron that cannot be expressed by the schema of Annex A. Annex C provides the default
query language binding to XSLT1. Annex D provides an ISO/IEC 19757-2 (RELAX NG compact syntax)
schema and corresponding ISO Schematron schema for a simple XML language Schematron Validation
Report Language. Annex E provides motivating design requirements for ISO Schematron. Annex F
specifies certain Schematron elements to be used in external vocabularies. Annex G provides a simple
example of a multi-lingual schema. Annexes H to M provide query language bindings. Annex N shows
example usage of Schematron properties.
This edition is backwards compatible with ISO/IEC 19757-3:2016, supersedes it and provides extra
query language bindings, in particular for XSLT3.
Considered as a document type, a Schematron schema contains natural-language assertions concerning
a set of documents, marked up with various elements and attributes for testing these natural-language
assertions and for simplifying and grouping assertions.
Considered theoretically, a Schematron schema reduces to a non-chaining rule system whose terms
are Boolean functions invoking an external query language on the instance and other visible XML
documents, with syntactic features to reduce specification size and to allow efficient implementation.
Considered analytically, Schematron has two characteristic high-level abstractions: the pattern and the
phase. These allow the representation of non-regular, non-sequential constraints that ISO/IEC 19757-2
cannot specify and various dynamic or contingent constraints.

This document is based on the Schematron[2] assertion language. The let element is based on XCSL[4].
Other features arise from the half-dozen early open-source implementations of Schematron in
diverse programming languages and from discussions in electronic forums by Schematron users and
implementers.

## 1 Scope

This document specifies Schematron, a schema language for XML. This document establishes
requirements for Schematron schemas and specifies when an XML document matches the patterns
specified by a Schematron schema. Schematron uses query languages such as XPath for writing
assertions.

## 2 Normative references

The following documents are referred to in the text in such a way that some or all of their content

constitutes requirements of this document. For dated references, only the edition cited applies. For
undated references, the latest edition of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies.
XPath1), XML Path Language (XPath) Version 1.0, W3C Recommendation, 16 November 1999
XPath22), XML Path Language (XPath) 2.0, W3C Recommendation, 23 January 2007
XPath33), XML Path Language (XPath) 3.0, W3C Recommendation, 8 April 2014
XPath2 Functions4), XQuery 1.0 and XPath 2.0 Functions and Operators, W3C Recommendation, 23
January 2007
XPath3 Functions5), XPath and XQuery Functions and Operators 3.0, W3C Recommendation, 8 April 2014
XSLT16), XSL Transformations (XSLT) Version 1.0, W3C Recommendation, 16 November 1999
XSLT27), XSL Transformations (XSLT) Version 2.0, W3C Recommendation, 23 January 2007
XSLT38), XSL Transformations (XSLT) Version 3.0, W3C Recommendation, 8 June 2017
ISO/IEC 19757-2, Information technology — Document Schema Definition Language (DSDL) — Part 2:
Regular-grammar-based validation — RELAX NG

## 3 Terms and definitions

For the purposes of this document, the following terms and definitions apply.

1) Available at http://www.w3.org/TR/xpath.
2) Available at http://www.w3.org/TR/xpath20/.
3) Available at https://www.w3.org/TR/xpath-30/.
4) Available at http://www.w3.org/TR/xpath-functions/.
5) Available at https://www.w3.org/TR/xpath-functions-30/.
6) Available at http://www.w3.org/TR/xslt.
7) Available at http://www.w3.org/TR/xslt20/.
8) Available at .https://www.w3.org/TR/xslt-30/.

ISO and IEC maintain terminological databases for use in standardization at the following addresses:
— ISO Online browsing platform: available at http://www.iso.org/obp
— IEC Electropedia: available at http://www.electropedia.org/
**3.1 abstract pattern**\
pattern (3.13) in a rule (3.18) that has been parameterized to enable reuse
**3.2 abstract rule**\
collection of assertions (3.5) which can be included in other rules (3.18) but which does not fire itself
**3.3 active pattern**\
pattern (3.13) belonging to the active phase (3.4)
**3.4 active phase**\
phase (3.14) whose patterns (3.13) are used for validation
**3.5 assertion**\
natural-language statement with associated assertion test (3.6) and ancillary attributes
**3.6 assertion test**\
Boolean query
Note 1 to entry: An assertion test "succeeds" or "fails".

**3.7 Schematron schema**\
document that satisfies all the requirements of this document
**3.8 diagnostic**\
named natural language statements providing information to end-users of validators concerning the
expected and actual values together with repair hints
**3.9 elaborated rule-context expression**\
single rule-context expression (3.20) which explicitly disallows items selected by lexically previous rule
contexts (3.19) in the same pattern (3.13)
**3.10 implementation**\
implementation of a Schematron validator
**3.11 name**\
mixture of name characters with a restricted set of initial characters
Note 1 to entry: See Production 5 of XML1.

**3.12 natural-language assertion**\
natural-language statement expressing some part of a pattern (3.13)
Note 1 to entry: A natural-language assertion is "met" or "unmet".

**3.13 pattern**\
unordered collection of rules (3.18) with an optional identifier and ancillary information
**3.14 phase**\
named, unordered collection of patterns (3.13)
Note 1 to entry: Patterns may belong to more than one phase.

Note 2 to entry: Two strings, #ALL and #DEFAULT, are reserved with particular meanings.

**3.15 progressive validation**\
validation of constraints in stages determined or grouped to some extent by the schema author rather
than, for example, entirely determined by the document order
**3.16 property**\
named data giving additional metadata on an assertion (3.5) or report
**3.17 query language binding**\
named set, specified in a document called a Query Language Binding, of the languages and conventions

used for assertion tests (3.6), rule-context expressions (3.20) and so on, by a particular Schematron
implementation (3.10)
**3.18 rule**\
unordered collection of assertions (3.5) with a rule-context expression (3.20) and ancillary attributes
**3.19 rule context**\
element or other information item used for assertion tests (3.6)
Note 1 to entry: A rule is said to fire when an information item matches the rule context.

**3.20 rule-context expression**\
query to specify subjects (3.21)
Note 1 to entry: A rule context (3.19) is said to match an information item when that information item has not
been matched by any lexically-previous rule-context expressions in the same pattern (3.13) and the information
item is one of the information items that the query would specify.

**3.21 subject**\
particular information item which corresponds to the object of interest of the natural-language
assertions (3.12) and typically is matched by the context expression of a rule (3.18)
**3.22 valid**\
```
<schema> passing all assertion tests (3.6) in fired rules (3.18) of active patterns (3.3)
**3.23 variable**\
```
constant value, represented by a name (3.11), evaluated within the parent schema, phase (3.14), pattern
(3.13) or rule (3.18) and scoped within the parent schema, phase, pattern or rule

## 4 Notation

This document uses XPath to identify information items, to the extent that items in the XPath data
model can be derived from those defined by XML Infoset, in Schematron schemas.

## 5 Syntax

### 5.1 Well-formedness

A Schematron schema shall be a well-formed XML document, according to the version of XML used.

### 5.2 Namespace

All elements shown in the grammar for Schematron are qualified with the namespace URI [IRI]:
http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron

In subsequent clauses, the prefix sch is taken as bound to the Schematron namespace URI for exposition
purposes. The prefix sch is not reserved or required by this document. Any element can also have
foreign attributes in addition to the attributes shown in the grammar. A foreign attribute is an attribute
with a name whose namespace URI is neither the empty string nor the Schematron namespace URI.
Any non-empty element may have foreign child elements in addition to the child elements shown in the

grammar. A foreign element is an element with a name whose namespace URI is not the Schematron
namespace URI. There are no constraints on the relative position of foreign child elements with respect
to other child elements.

### 5.3 Whitespace

Any element can also have children strings that consist entirely of whitespace characters, where
a whitespace character is one of U+0020, U+009, U+00D or U+00A. There are no constraints on the
relative position of whitespace string children with respect to child elements.
Leading and trailing whitespace should be stripped from attributes defined by this document.
Whitespace should be collapsed in elements defined by this document that allow text. Whitespace may
be stripped from elements defined by this document that do not allow text.

### 5.4 Core elements

#### 5.4.1 General

A Schematron schema shall follow the grammar given in Annex A.
For information on the use of Schematron elements in external vocabularies, see Annex F.

#### 5.4.2 active element

The required pattern attribute is a reference to a pattern that is active in the current phase.

#### 5.4.3 assert element

This element indicates an assertion made about the context nodes. The data content is a natural-
language assertion. The required test attribute is an assertion test evaluated in the current context. If
the test evaluates positive, the assertion succeeds. The optional diagnostics attribute is a reference to
further diagnostic information.
The natural-language assertion shall be a positive statement of a constraint.
The icon, see and fpi attributes (5.5.7, 5.5.12 and 5.5.6) allow rich interfaces and documentation.

The flag attribute (5.5.5) allows more detailed outcomes.
The role and subject attributes (5.5.11 and 5.5.14) allow explicit identification of some part of a
pattern.
The natural-language assertion may contain information about actual values in addition to expected
values and may contain diagnostic information. Users should note, however, that the diagnostic element
is provided for such information to encourage clear statement of the natural-language assertion.

#### 5.4.4 extends element

The extends element allows reference to the contents of other declarations. The extends element shall
either have an href attribute or a rule attribute but not both.
Abstract rules are named lists of assertions without a context expression. An extends element with a
rule attribute shall reference an abstract rule. The current rule uses all the assertions from the abstract
rule it extends.
An extends element with an href attribute shall reference external declarations. The href attribute is
an IRI reference to an external well-formed XML document or to an element in an external well-formed
XML document that is a Schematron element of the same type as the parent element of the extends
element. The contents of that referenced element shall be inserted in place of the extends element.
In such a case, the relative position of elements in the post-inclusion document may be to that extent

invalid against the schema for Schematron in Annex A; however, other schema constraints such as
containment shall still apply.

#### 5.4.5 include element

The required href attribute shall be an IRI reference to a well-formed XML document or to an element
in a well-formed XML document.
The referenced element shall be inserted in place of the include element. The referenced element shall
be a type which is allowed by the grammar for Schematron at the location of the include element.

#### 5.4.6 let element

The let element declares a named variable. If the let element is the child of a rule element, the variable
is calculated and scoped to the current rule and context. Otherwise, the variable is calculated with the
context of the instance document root.
The required name attribute is the name of the variable. The value attribute is an expression evaluated
in the current context. If no value attribute is specified, the value of the attribute is the element content
of the let element.
It is an error to reference a variable that has not been defined in the current schema, phase, pattern or
rule, if the query language binding allows this to be determined reliably. It is an error for a variable to
be multiply defined in the current schema, phase, pattern and rule.
The variable is substituted into assertion tests and other expressions in the same rule before the test
or expression is evaluated. The query language binding specifies which lexical conventions are used to
detect references to variables.

#### 5.4.7 name element

The name element provides the names of nodes from the instance document to allow clearer assertions
and diagnostics. The optional path attribute is an expression evaluated in the current context that
returns a string that is the name of a node. If the path attribute is omitted, the name of the context node
is used.

#### 5.4.8 ns element

The ns element specifies a namespace prefix and URI. The required prefix attribute is an XML name
with no colon character. The required uri attribute is a namespace URI [IRI].
Namespace prefixes in context expressions, assertion tests and other query expressions shall be defined
by this element. Namespace prefixes should not use the namespace bindings in scope for element and
attribute names.
NOTE 1   Namespace declarations as specified in XML 1.0 Namespaces (e.g. xmlns:foo="http://www.
example.com") do not apply to namespace prefixes in context expressions, assertion tests and other query
expressions.

NOTE 2      Because the characters allowed as names can change in versions of XML subsequent to W3C XML
1.0, the ISO/IEC 19757-2 (RELAX NG Compact Syntax) schema for Schematron does not constrain the prefix to
particular characters.

#### 5.4.9 param element

The param element specifies a name-value pair providing parameters for an abstract pattern. The required
name attribute is an XML name with no colon. The required value attribute is a fragment of a query.

#### 5.4.10 pattern element

The id attribute provides a unique name for the pattern and is required for abstract patterns. The child
rule elements of a pattern give constraints that are in some way related.

The optional documents attribute provides IRIs of the subordinate documents the rule contexts are
relative to. If the expression evaluates to more than one IRI, then the pattern is sought in each of the
documents. The documents attribute is evaluated in the context of the original instance document root.
The icon, see and fpi attributes (5.5.7, 5.5.12 and 5.5.6) allow rich interfaces and documentation.
When a pattern element has the attribute abstract with a value true, then the pattern defines an
abstract pattern. An abstract pattern shall not have an is-a attribute and shall have an id attribute.

#### 5.4.11 phase element

The phase element provides the means to declare named groups of patterns, for example to support
progressive validation. Additional information on design requirements for progressive validation is
provided in Annex E.
The required id attribute is the name of the phase. The element specifies the phase to be used for
validating documents, for example, by user command.
Two strings, #ALL and #DEFAULT, have special meanings when specifying active phases. The string #ALL
is reserved to denote that all patterns are active. The string #DEFAULT is to denote that the name given
in the defaultPhase attribute on the schema element should be used. If no defaultPhase is specified,
then all patterns are active.
The icon, see and fpi attributes (5.5.7, 5.5.12 and 5.5.6) allow rich interfaces and documentation.
The strings #ALL and #DEFAULT shall not be used as phase names in a Schematron schema. They are for
use when invoking or configuring schema validation, for example, as a command-line parameter.

#### 5.4.12 report element

The report element specifies an assertion made about the context nodes. The data content is a natural-
language assertion. The required test attribute is an assertion test evaluated in the current context.
If the test evaluates positive, the report succeeds. The optional diagnostics attribute is a reference to
further diagnostic information.

The natural-language assertion shall be a positive statement of a found pattern or a negative statement
of a constraint.
The icon, see and fpi attributes (5.5.7, 5.5.12 and 5.5.6) allow rich interfaces and documentation.
The flag attribute (5.5.5) allows more detailed outcomes.
The role and subject attributes (5.5.11 and 5.5.14) allow explicit identification of some part of a
pattern.
The natural-language assertion may contain information about actual values in addition to expected
values and may contain diagnostic information. Users should note, however, that the diagnostic element
is provided for such information to encourage clear statement of the natural-language assertion.

#### 5.4.13 rule element

The rule element provides a list of assertions tested within the context specified by the context
attribute. The context attribute, required unless the rule element has the attribute abstract with a
value true, specifies the rule-context expression.
The icon, see and fpi attributes (5.5.7, 5.5.12 and 5.5.6) allow rich interfaces and documentation.
The flag attribute (5.5.5) allows more detailed outcomes.

The role and subject attributes (5.5.11 and 5.5.14) allow explicit identification of some part of a pattern
as part of the validation outcome.
When the rule element has the attribute abstract with a value true, then the rule is an abstract rule.
An abstract rule shall not have a context attribute. An abstract rule is a list of assertions that will be
invoked by other rules belonging to the same pattern using the extends element. Abstract rules provide
a mechanism for reducing schema size.
It is not an error if a rule never fires in a document. In order to test that a document always has some
context, a new pattern should be created from the context of the document, with an assertion requiring
the element or attribute.

#### 5.4.14 schema element

The schema element is the top-level element of a Schematron schema.
The optional schemaVersion attribute gives the version of the schema. Its allowed values are not defined
by this document and its use is implementation-dependent.
The optional queryBinding attribute provides the short name of the query language binding in use. The
defaultPhase attribute may be used to indicate the phase to use in the absence of explicit user-supplied
information.
The icon, see and fpi attributes (5.5.7, 5.5.12 and 5.5.6) allow rich interfaces and documentation.

#### 5.4.15 value-of element

The value-of element finds or calculates values from the instance document to allow clearer assertions
and diagnostics. The required select attribute is an expression evaluated in the current context that
returns a string.
Variable references in the select attribute are resolved in the scope of the current schema, phase,
pattern and rule.

### 5.5 Ancillary elements and attributes

#### 5.5.1 diagnostic element

The diagnostic element provides a natural-language message giving more specific details concerning a
failed assertion, such as found versus expected values and repair hints.
NOTE 1     Diagnostics in multiple languages can be supported by using a different diagnostic element for each
language, with the appropriate xml:lang language attribute, and referencing all the unique identifiers of the
diagnostic elements in the diagnostics attribute of the assertion. Annex G gives a simple example of a multi-
lingual schema.

NOTE 2     Typical values for the role attribute on a diagnostic element can be warning, caution or note.

#### 5.5.2 diagnostics element

The diagnostics element provides a section containing individual diagnostic elements.

#### 5.5.3 dir element

The dir element provides a section of natural-language text with a direction specified by the value
attribute. The value ltr indicates left-to-right text; the value rtl indicates right-to-left text.

#### 5.5.4 emph element

The emph element encloses a portion of text that should be rendered with some emphasis.

#### 5.5.5 flag attribute

The flag attribute acts as a Boolean variable with the initial value false. A flag is implicitly declared by
an assertion or rule having a flag attribute with that name. The value of a flag becomes true when an
assertion with that flag fails or a rule with that flag fires.
The purpose of flags is to convey state or severity information to a subsequent process.

#### 5.5.6 fpi attribute

The fpi attribute contains a formal public identifier for the schema, phase or other element.

#### 5.5.7 icon attribute

The icon attribute contains the location of a graphics file containing some visible representation of the
severity, significance or other grouping of the associated element.

#### 5.5.8 p element

The p element represents a paragraph of natural language text containing maintainer and user
information about the parent element. The schema can nominate paragraphs that should be rendered
in a distinct way, keyed with the class attribute.

#### 5.5.9 properties element

The properties element provides a section containing individual property elements.

#### 5.5.10 property element

The property element declares additional arbitrary properties that will be associated with failed
assertions and successful reports.

The optional scheme attribute should be an IRI or other public identifier which specifies the notation
used for the metadata value.
NOTE 1     The property element is suitable for linking assertions or reports to actions, to additional metadata,
to datatyping, and to dynamically extracted text related to the subject.

NOTE 2     Where the property value contains elements in a well-known namespace or where the scheme
used is otherwise obvious or unnecessary, the scheme attribute can be omitted. For example, if the property
element contains an ISO/IEC 19757-7 Character Repertoire Description Language schema, no scheme attribute is
appropriate.

Properties are defined on assertions in order to associate assertion text with the property. A property of an
assert element typically should be information pertaining to validation. A property of a report element
typically should be information for document augmentation (post schema validation information set.)

NOTE 3      Properties do not participate in the validation of constraints.

For additional information on Schematron properties, see Annex N.

#### 5.5.11 role attribute

The role attribute is a name describing the function of the assertion or context node in the pattern.
If the assertion has a subject attribute, then the role labels the arc between the context node and any
nodes which match the path expression given by the subject attribute.

#### 5.5.12 see attribute

The see attribute contains the URI [IRI] of external information of interest to maintainers and users of
the schema.

#### 5.5.13 span element

The span element encloses a portion of some paragraph that should be rendered in a distinct way, keyed
with the class attribute.

#### 5.5.14 subject attribute

The subject attribute contains a path allowing more precise specification of nodes. The path expression
is evaluated in the context of the context node of the current rule. If no subject attribute is specified,
the current context node may be used.
NOTE         The subject attribute is required because it is possible that the rule context has been selected for
reasons of convenience or performance, in association with the particular assertion tests. In such cases, the
rule context is not useful to identify users, and the nodes located by the subject attribute can be more useful.
Similarly, it can be impossible to determine from an assertion test which nodes the assertion test has tested. In
such a case, the nodes located by the subject attribute can be more useful.

#### 5.5.15 title element

The title element contains a summary of the purpose or role of the schema, pattern or rule for the
purpose of documentation or a rich user interface.

## 6 Semantics

### 6.1 Validation function

A general Schematron validator is a function returning "valid", "invalid" or "error". The function
notionally performs two steps: transforming the schema into a minimal syntax, then testing the
instance against the minimal syntax.

A Schematron validator is a function over the following:
— a query language binding;
— a schema document;
— an instance to be validated;
— external XML documents addressed using information in the instance or schema;
— a phase name, or #ALL if all patterns shall be active patterns, or #DEFAULT if the defaultPhase
  attribute on the schema element shall be used;
— a list of name-value pairs, if the schema uses external variables.
NOTE        This document does not constrain other information provided by an implementation nor other uses
of Schematron schemas. However, it is the intent of this document to support implementations to provide rich,
specific diagnostics customised with values that assist in detecting and rectifying problems.

### 6.2 Minimal syntax (informative)

To simplify the specification of semantics later, the following transformation steps are first applied to a
schema, resulting in a schema in the minimal syntax.

— Resolve all inclusions by replacing the include element by the resource linked to.
— Resolve all abstract patterns by replacing parameter references with actual parameter values in all
  enclosed attributes that contain queries.
— Resolve all abstract rules in the schema by replacing the extends elements with the contents of the
  abstract rule identified.
— Negate all report elements into assert elements.
NOTE      In the case of an XPath-based query binding this negation can be achieved for simple cases by passing
the expression to the not() function, whereby e.g. <sch:report test="*"> would become <sch:assert
test="not(*)">.

— Remove elements used for diagnostics and documentation.
The resulting minimal syntax is also a valid Schematron instance in the full syntax. The minimal syntax
differs from the complex syntax by not containing the following XPaths.
— //sch:include
— //sch:pattern[@abstract="true"]
— //sch:pattern[@is-a]
— //sch:rule[@abstract="true"]
— //sch:extends
— //sch:report
— //sch:diagnostics
— //sch:p
— //sch:title

### 6.3 Abstract pattern processing

Abstract patterns allow a common definition mechanism for structures which use different names and
paths, but which are at heart the same. For example, there are different table markup languages, but
they all can be in large part represented as an abstract pattern where a table contains rows and rows
contain entries, as defined in the following example using the default query language binding:
```
<sch:pattern abstract="true" id="table">
  <sch:rule context="$table">
    <sch:assert test="$row">
    The element <name/> is a table. Tables contain rows.
    </sch:assert>
  </sch:rule>

  <sch:rule context="$row">
    <sch:assert test="$entry">
    The element <name/> is a table row. Rows contain entries.
    </sch:assert>
  </sch:rule>
</sch:pattern>

When a pattern element has the attribute is-a with a value specifying the name of an abstract pattern,
then the pattern is an instance of an abstract pattern. Such a pattern shall not contain any rule elements,
```
but shall have param elements for all parameters used in the abstract pattern.
The following example uses the abstract pattern for tables given above to create three patterns for

tables with different names or structures.
```
<sch:pattern is-a="table" id="HTML_Table">
  <sch:param name="table" value="table"/>
  <sch:param name="row" value="tr"/>
  <sch:param name="entry" value="td|th"/>
</sch:pattern>

<sch:pattern is-a="table" id="CALS_Table">
  <sch:param name="table" value="table"/>
  <sch:param name="row" value=".//row"/>
  <sch:param name="entry" value="entry"/>
</sch:pattern>

<sch:pattern is-a="table" id="calendar">
  <sch:param name="table" value="calendar/year"/>
  <sch:param name="row" value="week"/>
  <sch:param name="entry" value="day"/>
</sch:pattern>
```

When creating an instance of an abstract pattern, the parameter values supplied by the param element
replace the parameter references used in the abstract patterns. The examples above use the default
query language binding in which the character $ is used as the delimiter for parameter references.
Thus, given the abstract patterns defined earlier in this clause, the patterns defined above are
equivalent to the following, with the id elements shown expanded:
```
<sch:pattern id="HTML_table">
  <sch:rule context="table">
    <sch:assert test="tr">
    The element table is a table. Tables containing rows.
    </sch:assert>
  </sch:rule>
  <sch:rule context="tr">
    <sch:assert test="td|th">
    The element tr is a table row. Rows contain entries.
    </sch:assert>
  </sch:rule>
</sch:pattern>

<sch:pattern id="CALS_table">
  <sch:rule context="table">

    <sch:assert test=".//row">
    The element table is a table. Tables containing rows.
    </sch:assert>
  </sch:rule>
  <sch:rule context="row">
    <sch:assert test="entry">
    The element row is a table row. Rows contain entries.
    </sch:assert>
  </sch:rule>
</sch:pattern>

<sch:pattern id="calendar">
  <sch:rule context="calendar/year">
    <sch:assert test="week">
    The element year is a table. Tables containing rows.
    </sch:assert>
  </sch:rule>
  <sch:rule context="week">
    <sch:assert test="day">
    The element week is a table row. Rows contain entries.
    </sch:assert>
  </sch:rule>
</sch:pattern>
```

### 6.4 Query language binding

A query language binding shall provide the following:

— the general query language used; a name token which identifies the query language; the data model;
— the rule-context query language; the rule-context scope;
— the assertion test, a function which returns a data value coercible into Boolean.
A query language binding may also provide the following:
— the data models of the various query languages, the conversion between data models, and the
  treatment of information items: which information items are stripped or ignored, which information
  items are errors, and which information items are used;
— the name query language, a function which returns a data value coercible into a string;
— the value-of query language, a function which returns a data value coercible into a string;
— the let value query language, a function which returns a data value;
— the documents selecting query language, a function which returns a data value interpretable as a list
  or sequence of IRIs;
— the variable delimiter convention, a lexical convention such as a delimiter by which the use of a
  variable in a query expression shall be recognized;
— the abstract pattern parameter convention, a lexical convention such as a delimiter by which the
  parameters of abstract patterns inside query expressions shall be recognised.
The query language binding may also specify the element types in other namespaces which provide
query-language-specific ancillary information or pragmatic hints.
The query language binding shall specify any whitespace processing required on queries.
The query language binding shall specify any restrictions to the value of name tokens.
A Schematron implementation which does not support the query language binding, specified in a
schema with the queryBinding attribute, shall fail with an error.

The following query language names are reserved without further definition. Implementations which
use different query language bindings are encouraged to use one of these names if appropriate: stx,
xslt, exslt, xslt2, xslt3, xpath, xpath2, xpath3, xpath31, xquery, xquery3, xquery31. Any mix of upper
case and lower case letters in these names is permitted.
The default query language binding is xslt, which shall be in accordance with Annex C. For design
requirements for Schematron schemas using the default query language binding, see Annex E.
The query language bindings for XSLT2, XPath2, XSLT3 and XPath3 shall be in accordance with
Annexes H, I, J and K respectively. See Annexes L and M for additional information regarding other
query language bindings.

### 6.5 Order and side-effects

The order in which elements are validated is implementation-dependent, without altering the validity
of the instance.
The order in which patterns are used is implementation-dependent, without altering the validity of the
instance.
The order in which assertions are tested is implementation-dependent, without altering the validity of
the instance.
The only elements for which order is significant are the rule and let elements.

A rule element acts as an if-then-else statement within each pattern. An implementation may make
order non-significant by converting rules context expressions to elaborated rule-context expressions.
A let element may use lexically previous variables within the same rule or global variables.
All queries shall act as pure functions. Queries shall not alter the instance in any way visible to other
queries. This document does not specify any outcome augmentation of the instance being validated.
NOTE        The behaviour of the rule element allows constraints that would require a complex context expression
to be factored into simpler expressions in different rules.

## 7 Conformance

### 7.1 Simple conformance

A simple-conformance implementation shall be able to report for any XML document that it does not
conform to the constraints expressed by a given Schematron schema.
— A Schematron schema shall conform to the constraints of Annex A, the ISO/IEC 19757-2 (RELAX NG
  Compact Syntax) schema.
— A Schematron schema shall conform to the constraints of Annex B, the ISO Schematron schema.
A simple-conformance implementation shall be able to determine for any XML document and for any
Schematron schema whether the document is valid with respect to the schema.
NOTE 1      It is not a requirement of this document that a simple-conformance implementation be able to
determine whether validation will terminate or whether the queries are feasible against some other schema for
the instance. The ability to determine these depends on the query language used. Where the query language
allows incorrectness to be established, implementations are encouraged to report this information as part of the
validation.

NOTE 2     It is not a requirement of this document that a simple-conformance implementation be able to generate
validation reports in the Schematron Validation Report Language, defined in Annex D.

### 7.2 Full conformance

A full-conformance implementation shall be able to determine for any XML document whether it is a
correct schema.
— A Schematron schema shall conform to the constraints of Annex A, the ISO/IEC 19757-2 (RELAX NG
  Compact Syntax) schema.
— A Schematron schema shall conform to the constraints of Annex B, the ISO Schematron schema.
— A Schematron schema's attributes shall conform to the grammars specified by the query language
  binding in use.
— A Schematron schema shall have one definition only in scope for any global variable name in the
  global context and any local variable name in the local context.
— The values of the attributes flag, id, name and prefix shall be well-formed names in the version of
  XML being used.
A full-conformance implementation shall be able to determine for any XML document and for any good
schema whether the document is valid with respect to the schema.
NOTE 1      It is not a requirement of this document that a full-conformance implementation be able to determine
whether the validation will terminate or whether the queries are feasible against some other schema for the

instance. The ability to determine these depends on the query language used. Where the query language allows
incorrectness to be established, implementations are encouraged to report this information as part of the
validation.

NOTE 2     It is not a requirement of this document that a full-conformance implementation be able to generate
validation reports in the Schematron Validation Report Language, defined in Annex D.

## Annex A
*(normative)*

### RELAX NG schema for Schematron

A correct Schematron schema shall be valid with respect to the following ISO/IEC 19757-2 (RELAX NG
Compact Syntax) schema.
```
# Copyright © ISO/IEC 2017
# The following permission notice and disclaimer shall be included in all
# copies of this XML schema ("the Schema"), and derivations of the Schema:

# Permission is hereby granted, free of charge in perpetuity, to any
# person obtaining a copy of the Schema, to use, copy, modify, merge and
# distribute free of charge, copies of the Schema for the purposes of
# developing, implementing, installing and using software based on the
# Schema, and to permit persons to whom the Schema is furnished to do so,
# subject to the following conditions:

# THE SCHEMA IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
# IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,

# FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
# THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
# OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
# ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SCHEMA OR THE USE OR
# OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SCHEMA.

# In addition, any modified copy of the Schema shall include the following
# notice:

# "THIS SCHEMA HAS BEEN MODIFIED FROM THE SCHEMA DEFINED IN ISO/IEC 19757‑3,
# AND SHOULD NOT BE INTERPRETED AS COMPLYING WITH THAT STANDARD".

namespace local = ""
default namespace sch = "http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron"

start = schema

# Element declarations
schema =
    element schema {
         attribute id { xsd:ID }?,
         rich,
         attribute schemaVersion { non-empty-string }?,
         attribute defaultPhase { xsd:IDREF }?,
         attribute queryBinding { non-empty-string }?,
         (foreign
          & inclusion*
          & (title?, ns*, p*, let*, phase*, pattern+, p*, diagnostics?, properties?))
    }
active =
    element active {
         attribute pattern { xsd:IDREF },
         (foreign & (text | dir | emph | span)*)
    }
assert =
    element assert {
         attribute test { exprValue },
         attribute flag { flagValue }?,
         attribute id { xsd:ID }?,
         attribute diagnostics { xsd:IDREFS }?,
         attribute properties { xsd:IDREFS }?,
         rich,
         linkable,
         (foreign & (text | name | value-of | emph | dir | span)*)

     }
diagnostic =
     element diagnostic {
         attribute id { xsd:ID },
         attribute role { roleValue }?,
         rich,
         (foreign & (text | value-of | emph | dir | span)*)
     }
diagnostics = element diagnostics { foreign & inclusion* & diagnostic* }
dir =
     element dir {
         attribute value { "ltr" | "rtl" }?,
         (foreign & text)
     }
emph = element emph { text }
extends =
     element extends {
         (attribute rule { xsd:IDREF }
          | attribute href { uriValue }),
         foreign-empty
     }
let =
     element let {
         attribute name { nameValue },
         (attribute value { string }
          | foreign-element+)
     }
name =

     element name {
         attribute path { pathValue }?,
         foreign-empty
     }
ns =
     element ns {
         attribute uri { uriValue },
         attribute prefix { nameValue },
         foreign-empty
     }
p =
     element p {
         attribute id { xsd:ID }?,
         attribute class { classValue }?,
         attribute icon { uriValue }?,
         (foreign & (text | dir | emph | span)*)
     }
param =
     element param {
         attribute name { nameValue },
         attribute value { non-empty-string }
     }

pattern =
    element pattern {
        attribute documents { pathValue }?,
        rich,
        (foreign
          & inclusion*
          & ((attribute abstract { "true" },
              attribute id { xsd:ID },
              title?,
              (p*, let*, rule*))
             | (attribute abstract { "false" }?,
                attribute id { xsd:ID }?,
                title?,
                (p*, let*, rule*))
             | (attribute abstract { "false" }?,
                attribute is-a { xsd:IDREF },
                attribute id { xsd:ID }?,
                title?,
                (p*, param*))))
    }

phase =
    element phase {
         attribute id { xsd:ID },
         rich,
         (foreign & inclusion* & (p*, let*, active*))
    }
properties = element properties { property* }
property =
    element property {
         attribute id { xsd:ID },
         attribute role { roleValue }?,
         attribute scheme { text }?,
         (foreign & (text | name | value-of | emph | dir | span)*)
    }
report =
    element report {
         attribute test { exprValue },
         attribute flag { flagValue }?,
         attribute id { xsd:ID }?,
         attribute diagnostics { xsd:IDREFS }?,
         attribute properties { xsd:IDREFS }?,
         rich,
         linkable,
         (foreign & (text | name | value-of | emph | dir | span)*)
    }
rule =
    element rule {
         attribute flag { flagValue }?,

         rich,
         linkable,
         (foreign
          & inclusion*
          & ((attribute abstract { "true" },
               attribute id { xsd:ID },
               let*,
               (assert | report | extends | p)+)
             | (attribute context { pathValue },
                 attribute id { xsd:ID }?,
                 attribute abstract { "false" }?,
                 let*,
                 (assert | report | extends | p)+)))
    }
span =
    element span {
         attribute class { classValue },
         (foreign & text)
    }
title = element title { (text | dir)* }
value-of =
    element value-of {
         attribute select { pathValue },
         foreign-empty
    }

# common declarations
inclusion =
    element include {
        attribute href { uriValue },
        foreign-empty
    }
rich =
    attribute icon { uriValue }?,
    attribute see { uriValue }?,
    attribute fpi { fpiValue }?,
    attribute xml:lang { langValue }?,
    attribute xml:space { "preserve" | "default" }?
linkable =
    attribute role { roleValue }?,
    attribute subject { pathValue }?
foreign = foreign-attributes, foreign-element*
foreign-empty = foreign-attributes

foreign-attributes = attribute * - (local:* | xml:*) { text }*
foreign-element =
    element * - sch:* {
        (attribute * { text }
         | foreign-element
         | schema
         | text)*
    }

# Data types
uriValue = xsd:anyURI
pathValue = string
exprValue = string
fpiValue = string
langValue = xsd:language
roleValue = string
flagValue = string
nameValue = string

# In the default query language binding, xsd:NCNAME
classValue = string
non-empty-string = xsd:token { minLength = "1" }
```

## Annex B
*(normative)*

### Schematron schema for additional constraints

```
<!--
© ISO/IEC 2017
The following permission notice and disclaimer shall be included in all
copies of this XML schema ("the Schema"), and derivations of the Schema:
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge in perpetuity, to any
person obtaining a copy of the Schema, to use, copy, modify, merge and
distribute free of charge, copies of the Schema for the purposes of
developing, implementing, installing and using software based on the
Schema, and to permit persons to whom the Schema is furnished to do so,
subject to the following conditions:
THE SCHEMA IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SCHEMA OR THE USE OR
OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SCHEMA.

In addition, any modified copy of the Schema shall include the following
notice:
THIS SCHEMA HAS BEEN MODIFIED FROM THE SCHEMA DEFINED IN ISO/IEC 19757‑3,
AND SHOULD NOT BE INTERPRETED AS COMPLYING WITH THAT STANDARD."
-->

<sch:schema xmlns:sch="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron" xml:lang="en">
    <sch:title>Schema for Additional Constraints in Schematron</sch:title>
    <sch:ns prefix="sch" uri="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron"/>
    <sch:p>This schema supplies some constraints in addition to those given in the
        ISO/IEC 19757‑2
        (RELAX NG Compact Syntax) Schema for Schematron. </sch:p>
    <sch:pattern>
        <sch:rule context="sch:active">
            <sch:assert test="//sch:pattern[@id=current()/@pattern]"> The pattern
                attribute of the active element shall match the id
                attribute of a pattern.</sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="sch:pattern[@is-a]">
            <sch:assert test="//sch:pattern[@abstract='true'][@id=current()/@is-a]"> The
                is-a attribute of a pattern element shall match
                the id attribute of an abstract pattern.
            </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="sch:extends">
            <sch:assert test="//sch:rule[@abstract='true'][@id=current()/@rule]"> The rule
                attribute of an extends element shall match the id
                attribute of an abstract rule.
            </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="sch:let">
            <sch:assert
                test="not(//sch:pattern
                [@abstract='true']/sch:param[@name=current()/@name])"
                > A variable name and an abstract pattern parameter should not use the
                   same name.
            </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
    </sch:pattern>
</sch:schema>
```

## Annex C
*(normative)*

### Default query language binding

A Schematron schema with no query language binding or a queryBinding attribute with the value xslt,
in any mix of upper and lower case letters, shall use the following binding.
— The query language used shall be the extended version of XPath specified in XSLT1. Consequently,
  the data model used shall be the data model of those specifications.
— The rule context shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XSLT1. The rule context may be
  root nodes, elements, attributes, comments and processing instructions. An implementation may
  allow the rule context to be text nodes at user option however implementations may reject or fail to
  implement schemas which specify text nodes.
— The assertion test shall be interpreted according to Production 14 of XPath, as returning a
  Boolean value.

— The name query shall be interpreted according to Production 14 of XPath, as returning a string
  value. Typically, the path attribute contains an expression returning an element node: the name
  query takes the local or prefixed name of the node, not its value.
— The value-of query shall be interpreted according to Production 14 of XPath, as returning a
  string value.
— The let value shall be interpreted according to Production 14 of XPath, as returning a string value.
— The documents attribute of the pattern element shall be interpreted according to Production 14 of
  XPath, as returning one or more IRI strings that are evaluated using the document() function.
— The notation for signifying the use of parameter of an abstract pattern shall prefix the parameter
  name token with the character $. This is a character not found as a delimiter in URLs or XPaths. The
  character $ not followed by the name of an in-scope parameter shall not be treated as a parameter
  name delimiter. Such a character may subsequently be used as a delimiter for a variable name or as
  a literal character.
— A Schematron let expression shall be treated as an XSLT1 variable. The XSLT1 $ delimiter signifies
  the use of a variables in a context expression, assertion test, name query, value-of query or let
  expression. The character $ not followed by the name of an in-scope variable shall be treated as a
  literal character.
The XSLT1 key element may be used, in the XSLT1 namespace, before the pattern elements.
The XSLT1 copy-of element may be used, in the XSLT1 namespace and without child nodes, inside the
property element.

The attributes id, name and prefix should follow the rules for non-colonized names for the version of
XML used by the document.

## Annex D
*(informative)*

### Schematron Validation Report Language

### D.1 Description

The Schematron Validation Report Language (SVRL) is a simple XML language which may be used for
reporting the results of Schematron validation and for conformance suites.
The order of elements in an SVRL is implementation-dependent; different implementations may
generate the same elements in a different order.
All elements shown in the grammar for Schematron Validation Report Language are qualified with the
namespace URI:
http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/svrl

Elements related to the same subordinate document should be grouped together. In subsequent

schemas, the prefix svrl is taken as bound to the Schematron Validation Report Language namespace
URI for exposition purposes. The prefix svrl is not reserved or required by this document.

### D.2 RELAX NG compact syntax schema

```
# Copyright © ISO/IEC 2019
#
# The following permission notice and disclaimer shall be included in all
# copies of this XML schema ("the Schema"), and derivations of the Schema:
# Permission is hereby granted, free of charge in perpetuity, to any
# person obtaining a copy of the Schema, to use, copy, modify, merge and
# distribute free of charge, copies of the Schema for the purposes of
# developing, implementing, installing and using software based on the
# Schema, and to permit persons to whom the Schema is furnished to do so,
# subject to the following conditions:
#
# THE SCHEMA IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
# IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
# FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
# THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
# OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
# ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SCHEMA OR THE USE OR
# OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SCHEMA.
#
# In addition, any modified copy of the Schema shall include the following
# notice:
#
# THIS SCHEMA HAS BEEN MODIFIED FROM THE SCHEMA DEFINED IN ISO/IEC 19757‑3,
# AND SHOULD NOT BE INTERPRETED AS COMPLYING WITH THAT STANDARD."

namespace local = ""
default namespace svrl = "http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/svrl"

schematron-output =
    element schematron-output {
        attribute title { text }?,
        attribute phase { xsd:NMTOKEN }?,
        attribute schemaVersion { text }?,
        human-text*,
        ns-prefix-in-attribute-values*,

        (active-pattern,
         (fired-rule, (failed-assert | successful-report)*)*)+
    }
# only namespaces from sch:ns need to be reported
ns-prefix-in-attribute-values =
    element ns-prefix-in-attribute-values {
        attribute prefix { xsd:NMTOKEN },
        attribute uri { text },
        empty
    }
# only active patterns are reported
active-pattern =
    element active-pattern {
        attribute id { xsd:NCName }?,
        attribute documents { text }?,
        attribute name { text }?,
        attribute role {string }?,
        empty
    }
# only rules that are fired are reported,
fired-rule =
    element fired-rule {
        attribute id { xsd:NCName }?,
        attribute name { text }?,
        attribute context { text },
        attribute role { string }?,
        attribute flag { string }?,
        attribute document { xsd:anyURI }?,

        empty
    }
# only references are reported, not the diagnostic
diagnostic-reference =
    element diagnostic-reference {
        attribute diagnostic { xsd:NMTOKEN },
        human-text
    }
# only failed assertions are reported
failed-assert =
    element failed-assert {
        attlist.assert-and-report, diagnostic-reference*, property-reference*, human-text
    }
# only successful asserts are reported
successful-report =
    element successful-report {
        attlist.assert-and-report, diagnostic-reference*, property-reference*, human-text
    }
# property-reference
property-reference =
    element property-reference {
        attribute property { xsd:NMTOKEN },
        attribute role { text }?,
        attribute scheme { text }?,
        human-text
    }
# human text
human-text =
    element text {
        attribute xml:space { text }?,
        attribute xml:lang { text }?,
        attribute see { text }?,
        attribute icon { text }?,
        attribute fpi { text }?,
        rich-text
    }
# rich text
rich-text = (foreign | dir | span | emph | text)*
# directionality
dir =
    element dir {
        attribute class { text }?,
        attribute dir { text }?,

        text
    }
# emphasis
emph =
    element emph {
        attribute class { text }?,
        text
    }
# arbitrary markup
span =
    element span {
        attribute class { text },
        text
    }
# foreign
foreign = foreign-attributes | foreign-element
foreign-attributes = attribute * - (xml:* | local:*) { text }*
foreign-element =
    element * - svrl:* {
        (attribute * { text }
          | foreign-element
          | text)*
    }
attlist.assert-and-report =
    attribute id { xsd:NCName }?,
    attribute location { text },
    attribute test { text },
    attribute role { string }?,

    attribute flag { string }?
start = schematron-output
```

### D.3 Schematron Schema

The corresponding Schematron schema is:
```
<!--
Copyright © ISO/IEC 2014

The following permission notice and disclaimer shall be included in all
copies of this XML schema ("the Schema"), and derivations of the Schema:
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge in perpetuity, to any person obtaining a
copy of the Schema, to use, copy, modify, merge and
distribute free of charge, copies of the Schema for the purposes of
developing, implementing, installing and using software based on the
Schema, and to permit persons to whom the Schema is furnished to do so,
subject to the following conditions:
THE SCHEMA IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SCHEMA OR THE USE OR
OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SCHEMA.
In addition, any modified copy of the Schema shall include the following
notice:
THIS SCHEMA HAS BEEN MODIFIED FROM THE SCHEMA DEFINED IN ISO/IEC 19757‑3,
AND SHOULD NOT BE INTERPRETED AS COMPLYING WITH THAT STANDARD."
-->

<sch:schema xmlns:sch="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron" xml:lang="en">
    <sch:title>Schema for Schematron Validation Report Language</sch:title>
    <sch:ns prefix="svrl" uri="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/svrl"/>
    <sch:p>The Schematron Validation Report Language is a simple language
        for implementations to use to compare their conformance. It is
        basically a list of all the assertions that fail when validating
        a document, in any order, together with other information such as
        which rules fire. </sch:p>
    <sch:p>This schema can be used to validate SVRL documents, and provides examples
        of the use of abstract rules and abstract patterns.</sch:p>
    <sch:pattern>

        <sch:title>Elements</sch:title>
        <!--Abstract Rules -->
        <sch:rule abstract="true" id="second-level">
            <sch:assert test="../svrl:schematron-output"> The <sch:name/> element is a
                child of schematron-output. </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule abstract="true" id="childless">
            <sch:assert test="count(*)=0"> The <sch:name/> element should not contain
                any elements.
            </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule abstract="true" id="empty">
            <sch:extends rule="childless"/>
            <sch:assert test="string-length(normalize-space(.)) = 0"> The <sch:name/>
                element should be empty. </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <!-- Rules-->
        <sch:rule context="svrl:schematron-output">
            <sch:assert test="not(../*)"> The <sch:name/> element is the root element.
                </sch:assert>
            <sch:assert
                test="count(svrl:text) + count(svrl:ns-prefix-in-attribute-values)
+count(svrl:fired-rule) + count(svrl:failed-assert) +
        count(svrl:successful-report) = count(*)">
                <sch:name/> may only contain the following elements: text,
                ns-prefix-in-attribute-values, active-pattern, fired-rule, failed-assert
and
                successful-report. </sch:assert>

            <sch:assert test="svrl:active-pattern">
                <sch:name/> should have at least one active pattern. </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="svrl:text">
            <sch:extends rule="childless"/>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="svrl:diagnostic-reference">
            <sch:extends rule="childless"/>
            <sch:assert test="string-length(@diagnostic) &gt; 0">
                <sch:name/> should have a diagnostic attribute, giving the id of
                    the diagnostic.
            </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="svrl:ns-prefix-in-attribute-values">
            <sch:extends rule="second-level"/>
            <sch:extends rule="empty"/>
            <sch:assert
                test="following-sibling::svrl:active-pattern
            or following-sibling::svrl:ns-prefix-in-attribute-value"
                > A <sch:name/> comes before an active-pattern or another
                ns-prefix-in-attribute-values element. </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="svrl:active-pattern">
            <sch:extends rule="second-level"/>
            <sch:extends rule="empty"/>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="svrl:fired-rule">
            <sch:extends rule="second-level"/>
            <sch:extends rule="empty"/>
            <sch:assert
                test="preceding-sibling::active-pattern |
            preceding-sibling::svrl:fired-rule |
            preceding-sibling::svrl:failed-assert |
            preceding-sibling::svrl:successful-report"
                > A <sch:name/> comes after an active-pattern, an empty fired-rule,
                a failed-assert or a successful report. </sch:assert>
            <sch:assert test="string-length(@context) &gt; 0"> The <sch:name/> element
                should have a context attribute giving the current
                context, in simple XPath format. </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="svrl:failed-assert | svrl:successful-report">
            <sch:extends rule="second-level"/>
            <sch:assert test="count(svrl:diagnostic-reference) + count(svrl:text) =

                count(*)"> The <sch:name/> element should only contain a
                text element and diagnostic reference elements. </sch:assert>
            <sch:assert test="count(svrl:text) = 1"> The <sch:name/> element should only
                contain a text element. </sch:assert>
            <sch:assert
                test="preceding-sibling::svrl:fired-rule |
            preceding-sibling::svrl:failed-assert |preceding-sibling::svrl:successful-
                report"
                > A <sch:name/> comes after a fired-rule, a failed-assert or a successful-
                report.
            </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <!-- Catch-all rule-->
        <sch:rule context="*">
            <sch:report test="true()"> An unknown <sch:name/> element has been used.
                </sch:report>
        </sch:rule>
    </sch:pattern>
    <sch:pattern>
        <sch:title>Unique Ids</sch:title>
        <sch:rule context="*[@id]">
            <sch:assert test="not(preceding::*[@id=current()/@id][1])"> Id attributes
                should be unique in a document. </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
    </sch:pattern>
    <sch:pattern abstract="true" id="requiredAttribute">
        <sch:title>Required Attributes</sch:title>
        <sch:rule context=" $context ">

            <sch:assert test="string-length( $attribute ) &gt; 0"> The <sch:name/> element
                should have a <sch:value-of select="$attribute /name()"/> attribute.
                </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
    </sch:pattern>
    <sch:pattern is-a="requiredAttribute">
        <sch:param name="context" value="svrl:diagnostic-reference"/>
        <sch:param name="attribute" value="@diagnostic"/>
    </sch:pattern>
    <sch:pattern is-a="requiredAttribute">
        <sch:param name="context" value="svrl:failed-assert | svrl:successful-report"/>
        <sch:param name="attribute" value="@location"/>
    </sch:pattern>
    <sch:pattern is-a="requiredAttribute">
        <sch:param name="context" value="svrl:failed-assert | svrl:successful-report"/>
        <sch:param name="attribute" value="@test"/>
    </sch:pattern>
    <sch:pattern is-a="requiredAttribute">
        <sch:param name="context" value="svrl:ns-prefix-in-attribute-values"/>
        <sch:param name="attribute" value="@uri"/>
    </sch:pattern>
    <sch:pattern is-a="requiredAttribute">
        <sch:param name="context" value="svrl:ns-prefix-in-attribute-values"/>
        <sch:param name="attribute" value="@prefix"/>
    </sch:pattern>
</sch:schema>
```

## Annex E
*(informative)*

### Design requirements

Motivating design requirements for the schema language with the default query language binding
include the following:
— represent abstract patterns such as the head+body pattern;
— support progressive validation of compound documents; a compound document is a notional instance
  document which has been divided into the original instance and a number of subordinate well-
  formed XML documents; these subordinate documents may also contain schema-like information;
— include assertions or abstract rules from an external file;
— support a one-to-one mapping between the natural-language statements and artificial-language
  statements;
— support the generation and labelling of arcs between information items.

Motivating design requirements for the schema language with the default query language binding do
not include the following.
— simple specification of constraints that are simply expressed by grammar-based validation, such as
  ISO/IEC 19757-2 (RELAX NG) schemas;
— replacement of any other standard schema language for XML;
— single-pass or streamable implementation.
Certain outcomes are out-of-scope for this document:
— specification of a type system;
— generation of links between multiple occurrences of some datum across multiple documents for the
  purpose of consistency-checking.
Motivating requirements for the changes introduced in this document include the following;
— support more query language bindings, in particular XSLT3.

## Annex F
*(informative)*

### Use of Schematron as a vocabulary

The following Schematron element types may be used as vocabulary elements by other standards and
schemas. The semantics of element types used externally should follow this document:
— schema;
— pattern;
— rule;
— assert;
— report.
These elements should use the standard Schematron namespace specified in 5.2.

When Schematron elements other than the schema element are used as vocabulary elements by
other standards and schemas, the other standard or schema should specify mechanisms for defining
information otherwise supplied by Schematron elements, such as ns or let.

## Annex G
*(informative)*

### Use of Schematron for multi-lingual schemas

The following Schematron schema shows how multiple languages may be supported.
```
<sch:schema xmlns:sch="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron" xml:lang="en">
    <sch:title>Example of Multi-Lingual Schema</sch:title>
    <sch:pattern>
        <sch:rule context="dog">
            <sch:assert test="bone" diagnostics="d1 d2"> A dog should have a bone.
                </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
    </sch:pattern>
    <sch:diagnostics>
        <sch:diagnostic id="d1" xml:lang="en"> A dog should have a bone. </sch:diagnostic>
        <sch:diagnostic id="d2" xml:lang="de"> Ein Hund sollte ein Bein haben. </
sch:diagnostic>
    </sch:diagnostics>
</sch:schema>
```

## Annex H
*(normative)*

### Query language binding for XSLT2

The xslt2 query language binding allows schemas implemented using XSLT2. All implementations that
support the xslt2 query language binding should also support xpath2 query language binding.
A Schematron schema with a queryBinding attribute with the value xslt2, in any mix of upper and
lower case letters, shall use the following binding.
— The query language used shall be the extended version of XPath2 specified in XSLT2 with backwards
  compatibility mode as false. Consequently, the data model used shall be the data model of XDM
  constructed from an infoset or a PSVI. All namespaces, prefixes, functions and operators defined
  by XPath2 Functions shall be available. An implementation may allow user-written functions and
  extensions, in the appropriate namespace.
— The rule context shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XSLT2. The rule context may
  be root nodes, elements, attributes, comments and processing instructions, including sequences

  of these. An implementation may allow the rule context to be text nodes at user option however
  implementations may reject or fail to implement schemas which specify text nodes.
— The assertion test shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2, using fn:boolean() on
  the result of evaluating the expression and to find the effective Boolean value.
— The name query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2, using fn:node-name() on
  the result of evaluating the expression which should be an element or attribute node and returning
  a string value.
— The value-of query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2, using fn:string() on
  the result of evaluating the expression and returning a string value.
— The let value shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2.
— The documents attribute of the element shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2, as
  returning a sequence of strings that are evaluated using the document() function.
— The notation for signifying the use of a parameter of an abstract pattern shall prefix the parameter
  name token with the character $. This is a character not found as a delimiter in URLs or XPaths. The
  character $ not followed by the name of an in-scope parameter shall not be treated as a parameter
  name delimiter. Such a character may subsequently be used as a delimiter for a variable name or as
  a literal character.
— A Schematron let expression shall be treated as an XSLT2 variable. The XSLT2 $ delimiter signifies
  the use of a variables in a context expression, assertion test, name query, value-of query or let
  expression. The character $ not followed by the name of an in-scope variable shall be treated as a
  literal character.
— All namespaces and prefixes defined by XSLT2 for modules shall be reserved with their XSLT2
  usage. All functions defined by these modules shall be available in addition to the functions defined
  by XPath2 Functions.
The XSLT2 key element may be used, in the XSLT2 namespace, before the pattern elements.
The XSLT2 function element may be used, in the XSLT2 namespace, before the pattern elements.

The XSLT2 copy-of element may be used, in the XSLT2 namespace and without child nodes, inside the
property element.

The attributes id, name and prefix should follow the rules for non-colonized names for the version of
XML used by the document.
The fn:error() function or other dynamic errors should not be used to provide assertion text or to
substitute for assertions and diagnostics.

## Annex I
*(normative)*

### Query language binding for XPath2

The xpath2 query language binding allows schemas implemented using XPath2.
A Schematron schema with a queryBinding attribute with the value xpath2, in any mix of upper and
lower case letters, shall use the following binding.
— By default the query language used shall be that of XPath2 used with no XSD[5] schema and with
  backwards compatibility mode as false. Consequently, the data model used shall be the data model
  of XDM constructed from an infoset not a post schema validation infoset. All namespaces, prefixes,
  functions and operators defined by XPath2 Functions shall be available. No user-written functions
  or extensions shall be available.
— The rule context shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2. The rule context may be
  elements, attributes, comments and processing instructions, including sequences of these.

— The assertion test shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2, using fn:boolean() on
  the result of evaluating the expression and to find the effective Boolean value.
— The name query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2, using fn:node-name() on
  the result of evaluating the expression which should be an element or attribute node and returning
  a string value.
— The value-of query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2, using fn:string() on
  the result of evaluating the expression and returning a string value.
— The let element should not be used.
The attributes id, name and prefix should follow the rules for non-colonized names for the version of
XML used by the document.
The fn:error() function or other dynamic errors should not be used to provide assertion text or to
substitute for assertions and diagnostics.

## Annex J
*(normative)*

### Query language binding for XSLT3

The xslt3 query language binding allows schemas implemented using XSLT3. All implementations that
support the xslt3 query language binding should also support xpath3 query language binding.
A Schematron schema with a queryBinding attribute with the value xslt3, in any mix of upper and
lower case letters, shall use the following binding.
— The query language used shall be the extended version of XPath3 specified in XSLT3 with backwards
  compatibility mode as false. Consequently, the data model used shall be the data model of XDM
  constructed from an infoset or a PSVI. All namespaces, prefixes, functions and operators defined
  by XPath3 Functions shall be available. An implementation may allow user-written functions and
  extensions, in the appropriate namespace.
— The rule context shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XSLT3. The rule context may
  be root nodes, elements, attributes, comments and processing instructions, including sequences

  of these. An implementation may allow the rule context to be text nodes at user option however
  implementations may reject or fail to implement schemas which specify text nodes.
— The assertion test shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, using fn:boolean() on
  the result of evaluating the expression and to find the effective Boolean value.
— The name query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, using fn:node-name() on
  the result of evaluating the expression which should be an element or attribute node and returning
  a string value.
— The value-of query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, using fn:string() on
  the result of evaluating the expression and returning a string value.
— The let value shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3.
— The documents attribute of the element shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, as
  returning a sequence of strings that are evaluated using the document() function.
— The notation for signifying the use of a parameter of an abstract pattern shall prefix the parameter
  name token with the character $. This is a character not found as a delimiter in URLs or XPaths. The
  character $ not followed by the name of an in-scope parameter shall not be treated as a parameter
  name delimiter. Such a character may subsequently be used as a delimiter for a variable name or as
  a literal character.
— A Schematron let expression shall be treated as an XSLT3 variable. The XSLT3 $ delimiter signifies
  the use of a variables in a context expression, assertion test, name query, value-of query or let
  expression. The character $ not followed by the name of an in-scope variable shall be treated as a
  literal character.
— All namespaces and prefixes defined by XSLT3 for modules shall be reserved with their XSLT3
  usage. All functions defined by these modules shall be available in addition to the functions defined
  by XPath3 Functions.
The XSLT3 key element may be used, in the XSLT3 namespace, before the pattern elements.
The XSLT3 function element may be used, in the XSLT3 namespace, before the pattern elements.

The XSLT3 copy-of element may be used, in the XSLT3 namespace and without child nodes, inside the
property element.

The attributes id, name and prefix should follow the rules for non-colonized names for the version of
XML used by the document.
The fn:error() function or other dynamic errors should not be used to provide assertion text or to
substitute for assertions and diagnostics.

## Annex K
*(normative)*

### Query language binding for XPath3

The xpath3 query language binding allows schemas implemented using XPath3.
A Schematron schema with a queryBinding attribute with the value xpath3, in any mix of upper and
lower case letters, shall use the following binding.
— By default the query language used shall be that of XPath3 used with no XSD[5] schema and with
  backwards compatibility mode as false. Consequently, the data model used shall be the data model
  of XDM constructed from an infoset not a post schema validation infoset. All namespaces, prefixes,
  functions and operators defined by XPath3 Functions shall be available. No user-written functions
  or extensions shall be available.
— The rule context shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3. The rule context may be
  elements, attributes, comments and processing instructions, including sequences of these.

— The assertion test shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, using fn:boolean() on
  the result of evaluating the expression and to find the effective Boolean value.
— The name query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, using fn:node-name() on
  the result of evaluating the expression which should be an element or attribute node and returning
  a string value.
— The value-of query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, using fn:string() on
  the result of evaluating the expression and returning a string value.
— The let element should not be used.
The attributes id, name and prefix should follow the rules for non-colonized names for the version of
XML used by the document.
The fn:error() function or other dynamic errors should not be used to provide assertion text or to
substitute for assertions and diagnostics.

## Annex L
*(informative)*

### Query language binding for EXSLT

The exslt query language binding is the default xslt binding augmented by the EXSLT[1] functions.
A Schematron schema with a queryBinding attribute with the value exslt, in any mix of upper and
lower case letters, shall use the following binding.
— The query language used shall be the extended version of XPath specified in XSLT1. Consequently,
  the data model used is the data model of those specifications.
— The rule context shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XSLT1. The rule context may be
  elements, attributes, comments and processing instructions.
— The assertion test shall be interpreted according to Production 14 of XPath, as returning a
  Boolean value.
— The name query shall be interpreted according to Production 14 of XPath, as returning a string value.

  Typically, the path attribute contains an expression returning an element node: the name query
  takes the local or prefixed name of the node, not its value.
— The value-of query shall be interpreted according to Production 14 of XPath, as returning a
  string value.
— The let value shall be interpreted according to Production 14 of XPath, as returning a string value.
— The documents attribute of the pattern element shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of
  XSLT1, as returning one or more IRI strings that are evaluated using the document() function.
— The notation for signifying the use of a parameter of an abstract pattern shall prefix the parameter
  name token with the character $. This is a character not found as a delimiter in URLs or XPaths. The
  character $ not followed by the name of an in-scope parameter shall not be treated as a parameter
  name delimiter. Such a character may subsequently be used as a delimiter for a variable name or as
  a literal character.
— A Schematron let expression shall be treated as an XSLT1 variable. The XSLT1 $ delimiter signifies
  the use of a variables in a context expression, assertion test, name query, value-of query or let
  expression. The character $ not followed by the name of an in-scope variable shall be treated as a
  literal character.
— All namespaces and prefixes defined by EXSLT[1] for modules shall be reserved with their EXSLT[1]
  usage. All functions defined by these modules shall be available in addition to the functions defined
  by Production 14 of XPath and Production 1 of XSLT1.
The XSLT1 key element may be used, in the XSLT1 namespace, before the pattern elements. The
attributes id, name and prefix should follow the rules for non-colonized names for the version of XML
used by the document.
NOTE      As EXSLT[1] does not require all implementations to provide all modules, some schemas using this
query language binding will fail if they use functions which the implementation does not provide.

## Annex M
*(informative)*

### Query language binding for STX

The stx query language binding provides a schema language suited to memory-efficient streaming
implementation.
A Schematron schema with a queryBinding attribute with the value stx, in any mix of upper and lower
case letters, shall use the following binding.
— The query language used shall be the streaming dialect of XPath specified in STX[3]. Consequently,
  the data model used shall be the data model of STX[3] which is a variant on XPath data model noting
  that all elements and attributes are treated as untyped in STX[3].
— The rule context shall be interpreted according to Production 2 of STX[3]. The rule context may be
  elements, attributes, comments and processing instructions.
— The assertion test shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of STX[3], as returning a

  Boolean value.
— The name query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of STX[3], as returning a string value.
  Typically, the path attribute contains an expression returning an element node: the name query takes
  the local or prefixed name of the node, not its value.
— The value-of query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of STX[3], as returning a
  string value.
— The let value shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of STX[3], as returning a string value.
— The notation for signifying the use of a parameter of an abstract pattern shall prefix the parameter
  name token with the character $. This is a character not found as a delimiter in URLs or XPaths. The
  character $ not followed by the name of an in-scope parameter shall not be treated as a parameter
  name delimiter. Such a character may subsequently be used as a delimiter for a variable name or as
  a literal character.
— A Schematron let expression shall be treated as an STX[3] variable. The STX[3] $ delimiter signifies
  the use of a variables in a context expression, assertion test, name query, value-of query or let
  expression. The character $ not followed by the name of an in-scope variable shall be treated as a
  literal character.
The attributes id, name and prefix should follow the rules for non-colonized names for the version of
XML used by the document.
The message element shall not be used to provide text for assertions and diagnostics.

## Annex N
*(informative)*

### Example usage of Schematron properties

### N.1 Running example

In the following examples, the property elements given should be placed inside the properties element
in the document below. It gives examples of properties usable by a validation application on an assert
element and properties usable for information set augmentation on a report element.
```
<sch:schema ...>
  <sch:title>Example schema of annotation with</sch:title>
  <sch:pattern>
    <sch:rule context="assetValue">
      <sch:assert test="true()" properties="precision3 non-negative-decimal iso8859-1">
      The element assetValue should be a non-negative decimal number, with three
      digits of precision, in Australian dollars.
      </sch:assert>

      <sch:report test="true()"
      properties="australianDollar precision3a thisElement thisValue ">
      The element assetValue should be a non-negative decimal number, with three digits
      of precision, in Australian dollars.
      </sch:report>
    </sch:pattern>

<sch:properties>
...
</sch:properties>

</sch:schema>
```

In the following examples, the values of the role attributes are neither defined nor reserved by this
document.

### N.2 Annotation with controlled vocabulary information

<sch:property id="australianDollar" scheme="ISO 4217" role="currency">AUD</sch:property>

### N.3 Annotation with static information

<sch:property id="precision3" role="precision" >3</sch:property>

### N.4 Annotation with static structured information

```
<sch:property id="precision3a" >
  <precision>3</precision>
</sch:property>
```

### N.5 Type annotation with XSD Simple Type

```
<sch:property id="non-negative-decimal" >
<xsd:simpleType type="xs:decimal">
<xsd:maxInclusive value="0" />
<xsd:fractionDigits value='2'/>
</xsd:simpleType>
</sch:property>
```

### N.6 Type annotation with dynamic information

```
<sch:property id="thisValue" role="value"><sch:value-of select="." /></sch:property>
```

### N.7 Type annotation with dynamic structured information

This can be used to draw in elements as well as values from the instance.
```
<sch:property id="thisElement" role="contents">
  <xslt:copy-of select="."
      xmlns:xslt="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform"/>
</sch:property>
```

### N.8 Annotation with ISO/IEC 19757-7 character repertoire reference

```
<sch:property id="iso8859-15" role="repertoire">         <repertoire xmlns="http://purl.oclc.org/
dsdl/crepdl/ns/structure/2.0"
 registry="IANA" number="111"/>
</sch:property>
```

### N.9 SVRL document

Let the instance be the single element which conforms to the properties above.

```
<assetValue>1000.00</assetValue>
```

The following is an SVRL document which transfers the properties from the report element.
```
<svrl:schematron-output xmlns:svrl="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/svrl">
<svrl:active-pattern />
<fired-rule context=" assetValue" />
<svrl:successful-report test="false()" location="/assetValue" >
<svrl:property-reference
property="australianDollar" scheme="ISO 4217" role="currency">AUD</sch:property>
<svrl:property-reference property= "precision3a" >
<precision>3</precision>
</svrl:property-reference>
<svrl:property-reference property ="thisValue" role="value">1000.00</property>
<svrl:property-reference property="thisElement" role="contents">
<assetValue>1000.00</assetValue>
</svrl:property>
<svrl:text>The element assetValue should be a non-negative decimal number, with
three digits of precision, in Australian dollars.</svrl:text>
</svrl:successful-report></svrl:schematron-output>
```

## Bibliography

1. EXSLT, Community library, http://www.exslt.org/
2. Resource Description for Schematron (web page), Rick Jelliffe, Computing Centre, Academia Sinica, Taipei, http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron
3. Streaming Transformations for XML (STX) Version 1.0, Public working draft, 27 April 2007, http:// stx.sourceforge.net/documents/spec-stx-20070427.html
4. XML Constraint Specification Language, José Carlos Leite Ramalho, Department of Informatics, School of Engineering, University of Minho, http://www.di.uminho.pt/~jcr/PROJS/xcsl-www/
5. XML Schema Part 1: Structures Second Edition, W3C Recommendation, 28 October 2004, http:// www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-1/
6. IRI, RFC 3987, IETF Request for Comment, Current version, http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987
7. W3C XML 1.0, Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Fifth Edition), W3C Recommendation, 26 November 2008, http://www.w3.org/TR/2008/REC-xml-20081126/
8. XDM XQuery 1.0 and XPath 2.0 Data Model (XDM), W3C Recommendation, 23 January 2007, http://www.w3.org/TR/xpath-datamodel/
9. ISO 8879:1986, Information processing — Text and office systems — Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML)
10. XML 1.0 Namespaces, Namespaces in XML 1.0 (Third Edition), W3C Recommendation 8 December 2009, http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/REC-xml-names-20091208/
11. ISO/IEC 19757-7:2009, Information technology — Document Schema Definition Languages (DSDL) — Part 7: Character Repertoire Description Language (CREPDL)
12. XML1, Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Fifth Edition), W3C Recommendation, 26 November 2008, http://www.w3.org/TR/2008/REC-xml-20081126/
13. XML Infoset, XML Information Set (Second Edition), W3C Recommendation 4 February 2004, http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-xml-infoset-20040204/

