# INTERNATIONAL STANDARD ISO/IEC 19757-3

**Fourth edition** &nbsp;&nbsp; **2025-09**

## Information technology — Document Schema Definition Languages (DSDL) —

### Part 3:\
Rule-based validation using Schematron

*Technologies de l'information — Langages de définition de schéma de documents (DSDL) —*\
*Partie 3: Validation basée sur des règles à l'aide de Schematron*

---

Reference number: **ISO/IEC 19757-3:2025(en)**

© ISO/IEC 2025

## COPYRIGHT PROTECTED DOCUMENT

© ISO/IEC 2025

All rights reserved. Unless otherwise specified, or required in the context of its implementation, no part of this publication may be reproduced or utilized otherwise in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, or posting on the internet or an intranet, without prior written permission. Permission can be requested from either ISO at the address below or ISO's member body in the country of the requester.

> ISO copyright office\
> CP 401 • Ch. de Blandonnet 8\
> CH-1214 Vernier, Geneva\
> Phone: +41 22 749 01 11\
> Email: copyright@iso.org\
> Website: www.iso.org

Published in Switzerland

## Contents

- *Foreword* … v
- *Introduction* … vi
- **1** Scope … 1
- **2** Normative references … 1
- **3** Terms and definitions … 2
- **4** Notation … 4
- **5** Syntax … 4
  - **5.1** Well-formedness … 4
  - **5.2** Namespace … 4
  - **5.3** Whitespace … 4
  - **5.4** Core elements … 5
    - **5.4.1** General … 5
    - **5.4.2** active element … 5
    - **5.4.3** assert element … 5
    - **5.4.4** extends element … 5
    - **5.4.5** group element … 6
    - **5.4.6** include element … 6
    - **5.4.7** let element … 6
    - **5.4.8** library element … 6
    - **5.4.9** name element … 6
    - **5.4.10** ns element … 6
    - **5.4.11** param element … 7
    - **5.4.12** pattern element … 7
    - **5.4.13** phase element … 7
    - **5.4.14** report element … 8
    - **5.4.15** rule element … 8
    - **5.4.16** rules element … 8
    - **5.4.17** schema element … 8
    - **5.4.18** value-of element … 9
  - **5.5** Ancillary elements and attributes … 9
    - **5.5.1** diagnostic element … 9
    - **5.5.2** diagnostics attribute … 9
    - **5.5.3** diagnostics element … 9
    - **5.5.4** dir element … 9
    - **5.5.5** emph element … 9
    - **5.5.6** flag attribute … 9
    - **5.5.7** from attribute … 10
    - **5.5.8** fpi attribute … 10
    - **5.5.9** icon attribute … 10
    - **5.5.10** p element … 10
    - **5.5.11** properties attribute … 10
    - **5.5.12** properties element … 10
    - **5.5.13** property element … 10
    - **5.5.14** role attribute … 11
    - **5.5.15** schematronEdition attribute … 11
    - **5.5.16** severity attribute … 11
    - **5.5.17** see attribute … 11
    - **5.5.18** span element … 11
    - **5.5.19** subject attribute … 11
    - **5.5.20** title element … 12
    - **5.5.21** visit-each attribute … 12
    - **5.5.22** when attribute … 12
- **6** Semantics … 12
  - **6.1** Validation function … 12
  - **6.2** Minimal syntax … 13
  - **6.3** Processing model … 13
  - **6.4** Abstract pattern processing … 14
  - **6.5** Query language binding … 16
  - **6.6** Order and side-effects … 16
  - **6.7** Localization and language fixup … 17
  - **6.8** Base URI fixup … 17
- **7** Conformance … 17
  - **7.1** Simple conformance … 17
  - **7.2** Full conformance … 17
- *Annex A (normative) RELAX NG schema for Schematron* … 19
- *Annex B (normative) Schematron schema for additional constraints* … 23
- *Annex C (normative) Default query language binding* … 25
- *Annex D (informative) Schematron Validation Report Language* … 26
- *Annex E (informative) Design requirements* … 35
- *Annex F (informative) Use of Schematron as a vocabulary* … 36
- *Annex G (informative) Use of Schematron for multi-lingual schemas* … 37
- *Annex H (normative) Query language binding for XSLT2* … 38
- *Annex I (normative) Query language binding for XPath2* … 40
- *Annex J (normative) Query language binding for XSLT3* … 41
- *Annex K (normative) Query language binding for XPath3* … 43
- *Annex L (normative) Query language binding for XPath31* … 44
- *Annex M (normative) Query language binding for XQuery3* … 45
- *Annex N (normative) Query language binding for XQuery31* … 47
- *Annex O (informative) Example usage of Schematron properties* … 49
- *Bibliography* … 51

## Foreword

ISO (the International Organization for Standardization) and IEC (the International Electrotechnical
Commission) form the specialized system for worldwide standardization. National bodies that are
members of ISO or IEC participate in the development of International Standards through technical
committees established by the respective organization to deal with particular fields of technical activity.
ISO and IEC technical committees collaborate in fields of mutual interest. Other international organizations,
governmental and non-governmental, in liaison with ISO and IEC, also take part in the work.
The procedures used to develop this document and those intended for its further maintenance are described
inthe ISO/IEC Directives. Part 1. In particular. the different approval criteria needed for the different tvpes of

document should be noted. This document was drafted in accordance with the editorial rules of the 1SO/ IEC

Directives, Part 2 (see https://www.iso.org/directives or https://www.iec.ch/members experts/refdocs).

ISO and JEC draw attention to the possibility that the implementation of this document may involve the

use of (a) patent(s). ISO and IEC take no position concerning the evidence, validity or applicability of any

claimed patent rights in respect thereof. As of the date of publication of this document, ISO and IEC had not

received notice of (a) patent(s) which may be required to implement this document. However, implementers

are cautioned that this may not represent the latest information, which may be obtained from the patent

database available at https://www.iso.org/patents and https://patents.iec.ch. ISO and IEC shall not be held

responsible for identifying any or all such patent rights.

Any trade name used in this document is information given for the convenience of users and does not

constitute an endorsement.

For an explanation of the voluntary nature of standards, the meaning of ISO specific terms and expressions

relatedto conformity assessment, as well as information aboutISO's adherenceto the World Trade Organization

(WTO) principles in the Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT) see https://www.iso.org/iso/foreword.html. In

the IEC, see https://www.iec.ch/understanding-standards.

This document was prepared by Joint Technical Committee ISO/IEC JTC 1, Information technology,

Subcommittee SC 34, Document description and processing languages.

This fourth edition cancels and replaces the third edition (ISO/IEC 19757-3:2020 {4]), which has been

technically revised.

The main changes are as follows:

— aquery language binding has been added for XQuery3 (Annex M);

— newelements group (5.4.5), Library (5.4.8) and rules (5.4.16) have been added;

— newattribute as has been added to element let (5.4.7), to enable datatyping of variables;

— newattributes schematronEdition (5.5.15) and severity (5.5.16) have been added;

— param elements (5.4.11) are now allowed for schemas and abstract patterns and in the latter case their
value can actas a default;

— attributes flag (5.5.6), role (5.5.14) and severity (5.5.16) are dynamically evaluated if their value is a
variable reference;

— element extends (5.4.4) is made available at the top level of a schema;

— the methods of base URI fixup (6.8) and language fixup (6.7) are specified;
— amapping of schema to SVRL structures is provided in Annex D.
A list of all parts in the ISO/IEC 19757 series can be found on the ISO website.
Any feedback or questions on this document should be directed to the user’s national standards body. A
complete listing of these bodies can be found at www.iso.org/members.html.

## Introduction

ISO/IEC 19757 (all parts) /41 defines a set of Document Schema Definition Languages (DSDL) that can be used
to specify one or more validation processes performed against Extensible Markup Language (XML 1.0/1)
or Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML) documents. [XML is an application profile SGML (see
ISO 8879 4).
A document model is an expression of the constraints to be placed on the structure and content of documents
to be validated with the model. A number of technologies have been developed through various formal
and informal consortia since the development of Document Type Definitions (DTDs) as part of ISO 8879
[I notably by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) and the Organization for the Advancement of
Structured Information Standards (OASIS). A number of validation technologies are standardized in DSDL
to complement those already available as standards or from the industry.
Through the validation that a structured document conforms to specified constraints in structure and
content, the potentially many applications acting on the document are relieved from duplicating the task
of confirming that such requirements have been met. Historically, such tasks and expressions have been
developed and utilized in isolation, without consideration of how the features and functionality available in
other technologies can enhance validation objectives.
Tha main ohiective of ISO/IEC 19757 (all narte) [21 ic ta hrino tacether different validatinn-related tacke

and expressions to form a single extensible framework that allows technologies to work in series or in
parallel to produce a single or a set of validation results. The extensibility of DSDL accommodates validation
technologies not yet designed or specified.

In the past, different design and use criteria have led users to choose different validation technologies
for different portions of their information. Bringing together information within a single XML document
sometimes prevents existing document models from being used to validate sections of data. By providing
an integrated suite of constraint description languages that can be applied to different subsets of a single
XML document, ISO/IEC 19757 (all parts) 14] allows different validation technologies to be integrated under
a well-defined validation policy.

The structure of this document is as follows. Clause 5 describes the syntax of a Schematron schema. Clause 6
describes the semantics of a correct Schematron schema; the semantics specify when a document is valid
with respect to a Schematron schema. Clause 7 describes conformance requirements for implementations
of Schematron validators. Annex A provides the ISO/IEC 19757-2 [51 (RELAX NG) schema for Schematron.
Annex B provides the Schematron schema for constraints in Schematron that cannot be expressed by the
schema of Annex A. Annex C provides the default query language binding to XSLT1. Annex D provides an
ISO/IEC 19757-2 51 (RELAX NG compact syntax) schema and corresponding Schematron schema for a simple
XML language Schematron Validation Report Language. Annex E provides motivating design requirements
for Schematron. Annex F specifies certain Schematron elements to be used in external vocabularies. Annex G
provides a simple example of a multi-lingual schema. Annex H to Annex M provide query language bindings.
Annex O shows example usage of Schematron properties.

This edition is backwards compatible with ISO/IEC 19757-3:2020 [1 to the extent that validation results
produced by existing schemas are unaffected by the changes this edition makes, supersedes it and provides
extra query language bindings, for XQuery3.

Considered as a document type, a Schematron schema contains natural-language assertions concerning a set
of documents, marked up with various elements and attributes for testing these natural-language assertions
and for simplifying and grouping assertions.

Considered theoretically, a Schematron schema reduces to a non-chaining rule system whose terms are
Boolean functions invoking an external query language on the instance and other visible XML documents,
with syntactic features to reduce specification size and to allow efficient implementation.

Considered analytically, Schematron has two characteristic high-level abstractions: the pattern and the
phase. These allow the representation of non-regular, non-sequential constraints that ISO/IEC 19757-2 [51
cannot specify and various dynamic or contingent constraints.

This document is based on the Schematron!® assertion language. The 1et element is based on XCSLIZJ.
Other features arise from the half-dozen early open-source implementations of Schematron in diverse
programming languages and from discussions in electronic forums by Schematron users and implementers.

# Part 3: Rule-based validation using Schematron

## 1 Scope

This document specifies Schematron, a schema language for XML. This document establishes requirements
for Schematron schemas and specifies when an XML document matches the patterns specified by a
Schematron schema. Schematron uses query languages such as XPath for writing assertions.

## 2 Normative references

The following documents are referred to in the text in such a way that some or all of their content constitutes
requirements of this document. For dated references, only the edition cited applies. For undated references,
the latest edition of the referenced document (including any amendments) applies.
Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Fifth Edition), 26 November 2008, https://www.w3.org/TR/2008/
REC-xml1-20081126/
ISO/IEC 19757-2, Information technology — Document Schema Definition Language (DSDL) — Part 2: Regular-
grammar-based validation — RELAX NG
XML 1.1, Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.1 (Second Edition), 16 August 2006, https://www.w3.org/TR/
2006/REC-xml11-20060816/
XML Inclusions (XInclude) Version 1.0 (Second Edition), 15 November 2006, https://www.w3.org/TR/2006/
REC-xinclude-20061115/
XML Path Language (XPath) 2.0, W3C Recommendation, 23 January 2007, https://www.w3.org/TR/
xpath20/
XML Path Language (XPath) 3.0, W3C Recommendation, 8 April 2014, https://www.w3.org/TR/xpath-30/
XML Path Language (XPath) 3.1, 21 March 2017, https://www.w3.org/TR/xpath-31/
XML Path Language (XPath) Version 1.0, W3C Recommendation, 16 November 1999, https://www.w3.org/
TR/xpath-10/
XPath and XQuery Functions and Operators 3.0, W3C Recommendation, 8 April 2014, https://www.w3.org/
TR/xpath-functions-30/

AQuery 1.U and Aratn 24.U Functions and Uperators, Wot hecommendaation, 14 December Z2U1U, Nttps://www
.w3.org/TR/2010/REC-xpath-functions-20101214/
XQuery 3.0: An XML Query Language, 08 April 2014, https://www.w3.org/TR/xquery-30/
XQuery 3.1: An XML Query Language, 21 March 2017, https://www.w3.org/TR/xquery-31/
XSL Transformations (XSLT) Version 1.0, W3C Recommendation, 16 November 1999, https://www.w3.org/
TR/xslt-10/

XSL Transformations (XSLT) Version 2.0, W3C Recommendation, 23 January 2007, http://www.w3.org/TR/
xslt20/
XSL Transformations (XSLT) Version 3.0, W3C Recommendation, 8 June 2017, https://www.w3.org/TR/xslt-30/

## 3 Terms and definitions

For the purposes of this document, the following terms and definitions apply.
ISO and IEC maintain terminology databases for use in standardization at the following addresses:
— ISO Online browsing platform: available at https://www.iso.org/obp
— IEC Electropedia: available at https://www.electropedia.org/
**3.1 abstract pattern**\
pattern (3.13) in a Schematron schema (3.7) that has been parameterized to enable reuse

abstract rule

collection of assertions (3.5) which can be included in other rules (3.18) but which does not fire itself
3.3

active pattern

pattern (3.13) belonging to the active phase (3.4)

3.4

active phase

phase (3.14) whose patterns (3.13) are used for validation

3.5

assertion

natural-language statement with associated assertion test (3.6) and ancillary attributes

3.6

assertion test

query returning a Boolean value

Note 1 to entry: An assertion test "succeeds" or "fails".

3.7

Schematron schema

document that satisfies all the requirements of this document

3.8

diagnostic

named natural-language statements providing information to end-users of validators concerning the
expected and actual values together with repair hints

3.9

elaborated rule-context expression

single rule-context expression (3.20) which explicitly disallows items selected by lexically previous rule
contexts (3.19) in the same pattern (3.13)

3.10

implementation

instantiation of a Schematron validator

**3.11 name**\
mixture of characters with a restricted set of initial characters
Note 1 to entry: See Production 5 of XML 1.021,
**3.12 natural-language assertion**\
natural-language statement expressing some part of a pattern (3.13)
Note 1 to entry: A natural-language assertion is "met" or "unmet".
**3.13 pattern**\
collection of rules (3.18) with an optional identifier and ancillary information
Note 1 to entry: Patterns of a schema do not have a defined order.
Note 2 to entry: Patterns are represented in schemas by elements pattern (5.4.12) and group (5.4.5).
**3.14 phase**\
named, unordered collection of patterns (3.13)
Note 1 to entry: Patterns may belong to more than one phase.
Note 2 to entry: Three strings, #ALL, #ANY and #DEFAULT, are reserved with particular meanings.
**3.15 progressive validation**\
validation of constraints in stages determined or grouned to some extent by the schema author rather than.

for example, entirely determined by the document order
**3.16 property**\
named data giving additional metadata on an assertion (3.5) or report
**3.17 query language binding**\
named set, specified in a document, of the languages and conventions used for assertion tests (3.6), rule-
context expressions (3.20) and so on, by a particular Schematron implementation (3.10)
**3.18 rule**\
unordered collection of assertions (3.5) with a rule-context expression (3.20) and ancillary attributes
**3.19 rule context**\
element or other information item used for assertion tests (3.6)
Note 1 to entry: A rule (3.18) is said to fire when an information item matches the rule context.
**3.20 rule-context expression**\
query to specify subjects (3.21)
Note 1 to entry: A rule context (3.19) is said to match an information item when that information item has not been
matched by any lexically-previous rule-context expressions in the same pattern (3.13) and the information item is one
of the information items that the query would specify.

oN /INLm 40OFF FF NLNNAY F&F 62.<«.

ROU] EES AFL II IVALICE UY
**3.21 subject**\
particular information item which corresponds to the object of interest of the natural-language assertions
(3.12) and typically is matched by the context expression of a rule (3.18)
Note 1 to entry: Subjects can be more precisely defined in schemas by the subject attribute (5.5.19).
**3.22 valid**\
passing all assertion tests (3.6) in fired rules (3.18) of active patterns (3.3)
**3.23 variable**\
constant value, represented by a name (3.11), evaluated within the parent schema, phase (3.14), pattern
(3.13) or rule (3.18) and scoped within the parent schema, phase, pattern or rule
Note 1 to entry: Variables are represented in schemas by elements let (5.4.7) and param (5.4.11).

## 4 Notation

This document uses XPath to identify information items, to the extent that items in the XPath data model
can be derived from those defined by XML Infosetl£l, in Schematron schemas.

## 5 Syntax

### 5.1 Well-formedness

A Schematron schema shall be a well-formed XML document, according to the version of XML (XML 1.0 or
XML 1.1) used.

### 5.2 Namespace

All elements shown in the grammar for Schematron are qualified with the namespace URI [IRI]:
http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron
In this document, the prefix sch is taken as bound to the Schematron namespace URI for exposition purposes.
TL wwrnkixr ol tn wnt wn nnaddndA Aw wnniiwinnd laws thetn Han niweenwntk Awe nlrawnunt nnn anlen Ln frauninn nttwihwitaer

illo Pt ELliA OCI] bo LIVE LO©oeIiveu vi ey cu vy Lillo UVULUIIICIIL, fAally LCL Lalli adlovV LliaVe ivi Clot ALLIIVULES
in addition to the attributes shown in the grammar. A foreign attribute is an attribute with a name whose
namespace URI is neither the empty string nor the Schematron namespace URI. Any non-empty element may
have foreign child elements in addition to the child elements shown in the grammar. A foreign element is an
element with a name whose namespace URI is not the Schematron namespace URI. There are no constraints
on the relative position of foreign child elements with respect to other child elements.

### 5.3 Whitespace

Any element can also have children strings that consist entirely of whitespace characters, where a
whitespace character is one of U+0020, U+009, U+00D or U+00A. There are no constraints on the relative
position of whitespace string children with respect to child elements.
Leading and trailing whitespace should be stripped from attributes defined by this document. Whitespace
should be collapsed in elements defined by this document that allow text. Whitespace may be stripped from
elements defined by this document that do not allow text.

### 5.4 Core elements

#### 5.4.1 General

A Schematron schema shall follow the grammar given in Annex A.
For information on the use of Schematron elements in external vocabularies, see Annex F.

#### 5.4.2 active element

The required pattern attribute is a reference to a pattern that is active in the current phase.

5.4.3. assert element

This element indicates an assertion made about the context nodes. The data content is a natural-language
assertion. The required test attribute is an assertion test evaluated in the current context. If the test
evaluates positive, the assertion succeeds. The optional diagnostics attribute is a reference to further
diagnostic information. The optional properties attribute is a reference to additional arbitrary properties.
The natural-language assertion shall be a positive statement of a constraint.

The icon, see and fpi attributes (5.5.9, 5.5.17 and 5.5.8) allow rich interfaces and documentation.

The flag attribute (5.5.6) allows more detailed outcomes.

The role and subject attributes (5.5.14 and 5.5.19) allow explicit identification of some part of a pattern.
The optional severity attribute (5.5.16) expresses the relative importance of an assertion.

The natural-language assertion may contain information about actual values in addition to expected
values and may contain diagnostic information. Users should note, however, that the diagnostic element is
provided for such information to encourage clear statement of the natural-language assertion.

#### 5.4.4 extends element

The extends element allows reference to the contents of other declarations. The extends element shall either
have an href attribute or a rule attribute but not both.

Abstract rules are named lists of assertions without a context expression. An extends element with a rule
attribute shall reference an abstract rule. The current rule uses all the assertions from the abstract rule it
extends.

An extends element with an href attribute shall reference external declarations. An external declaration is a
Schematron element of the same type as the parent element of the extends element: schema, library Or rule.
NOTE There is no requirement for rule elements referenced using an href attribute to be abstract.

The href attribute is an IRI reference to an external well-formed XML document or to an element in an
external well-formed XML document. Ifa document is referenced, its root element is the external declaration,
mth Anwrarienn than pnlrnwennt unfranunurnedy tan than vanrtnunnanl AnAanrlanuntinn ThA nnwntanutn nL EKA Axrtnunnl Aanrlnuntinu rip!

VULICL Widoht ELLIS CICIICLIL LOLS CLV fo Lilie CACC LAG UCLIGIAGLIUIL, LLIS LVIILOLILOG Ul LLIS CALC Lidl UCLIGIAGLIUIEI Olidil
be inserted in place of the extends element.
In such a case, the relative position of elements in the post-inclusion document may be to that extent invalid
against the schema for Schematron in Annex A; however, other schema constraints such as containment
shall still apply.
An implementation shall report any errors encountered during the processing of extends, for diagnostic
purposes. Whether an implementation terminates in this event is implementation-defined.

#### 5.4.5 group element

The group element has the same structure and semantics as element pattern (5.4.12), except that the if-then-
else behaviour of evaluating rules within a pattern shall not apply (see ¢.6).

#### 5.4.6 include element

The required href attribute shall be an IRI reference to a well-formed XML document or to an element in a
well-formed XML document.
The referenced element shall be inserted in place of the include element. The referenced element shall be a
type which is allowed by the grammar for Schematron at the location of the include element.
An implementation shall report any errors encountered during the processing of include, for diagnostic
purposes. Whether an implementation terminates in this event is implementation-defined.

#### 5.4.7 1et element

The let element declares a named variable. If the 1et element is the child of a rule element, the variable is
calculated and scoped to the current rule and context. Otherwise, the variable is calculated with the context
of the instance document root.

The required name attribute is the name of the variable. The value attribute is an expression evaluated in the
current context. If no value attribute is specified, the value of the attribute is the element content of the let
element.

The optional as attribute is the datatype of the variable. The query language binding shall determine
whether the as attribute is supported and how it is processed.

It is an error to reference a variable that has not been defined in the current schema, phase, pattern or rule,
if the query language binding allows this to be determined reliably. It is an error for a variable to be multiply
defined in the current schema, phase, pattern and rule.

The variable is substituted into assertion tests and other expressions in the same rule before the test or
expression is evaluated. The query language binding specifies which lexical conventions are used to detect
references to variables.

#### 5.4.8 library element

The library element is an allowed root element containing external declarations, including abstract rules
(see 5.4.16) and patterns (see 5.4.12 and 5.4.5).

The contents of this element can be included in a schema by using extends (See 5.4.4).

#### 5.4.9 name element

The name element provides the names of nodes from the instance document to allow clearer assertions and
diagnostics. The optional path attribute is an expression evaluated in the current context that returns a
string that is the name of a node. If the path attribute is omitted, the name of the context node is used.

#### 5.4.10 ns element

The ns element specifies a namespace prefix and URI. The required prefix attribute is an XML name with no
colon character. The required uri attribute is a namespace URI [IRI].

Namespace prefixes in context expressions, assertion tests and other query expressions shall be defined by this
element. Namespace prefixes shall not use the namespace bindings in scope for element and attribute names.
NOTE 1 Namecnarce declaratinne a¢ cnercified in YM]. 10 Namecnacec!10! fag vmlne: fan htrtn: J Jum avamnla.

nnn nnn nn nnn nn nnn nnn nn nnn nn nn nnn nnn nnn nnn nnn nnn EE
com") do not apply to namespace prefixes in context expressions, assertion tests and other query expressions.
NOTE2 Because the characters allowed as names can change in versions of XML subsequent to W3C XML 1.021, the
ISO/IEC 19757-2 [51 (RELAX NG Compact Syntax) schema for Schematron does not constrain the prefix to particular
characters.

#### 5.4.11 param element

The param element specifies a name-value pair providing parameters for an abstract pattern or a schema.
The required name attribute is an XML name with no colon. The value attribute is a fragment of a query.
The value attribute is required for parameters specified for schemas. The value of a parameter for a schema
may be overridden at user option. This mechanism is implementation-defined.
The value of a parameter is specified for concrete patterns by the value attribute or if absent by the value
attribute of a parameter whose name attribute matches that of a parameter for the abstract pattern the
concrete pattern instantiates. It is an error if no parameter value is thereby specified for a concrete pattern.
In a schema the names of pattern parameters and the number specified shall correspond between abstract
and concrete patterns.
Parameter names shall be distinct within the scope of a pattern or schema.

#### 5.4.12 pattern element

The id attribute provides a unique name for the pattern and is required for abstract patterns. The child rule
elements of a pattern give constraints that are in some way related.
The optional documents attribute provides IRIs of the subordinate documents the rule contexts are relative
to The dooymente attrihite ic avaliated in the conteyt of the oricgingal inctance docijment root Variahlec

a a ee a i ee ee ee ee ee ee a ee, © er ee ee i ee ee ee ee ee
scoped to the pattern are not in scope when evaluating the documents attribute. The pattern is sought in
each of the documents located at the IRI(s) which result from evaluating the expression and is not sought
in the original instance document. Relative IRIs are resolved relative to the base IRI of the original instance
document.

Conformant implementations should retrieve the subordinate documents in such a way that the results are
deterministic. Where a document cannot be retrieved, the implementation shall report this for diagnostic
purposes, and may do so by using element svrl:error (see Annex D). Whether the processor terminates in
this event is implementation-defined.
The icon, see and fpi attributes (5.5.9, 5.5.17 and 5.5.8) allow rich interfaces and documentation.
When a pattern element has the attribute abstract with a value true, then the pattern defines an abstract
pattern. An abstract pattern shall not have an is-a attribute and shall have an id attribute.

#### 5.4.13 phase element

The phase element provides the means to declare named groups of patterns, for example to support
progressive validation. Additional information on design requirements for progressive validation is
provided in Annex E.
The required id attribute is the name of the phase. The element specifies the phase to be used for validating
documents, for example, by user command.
The optional from attribute (see 5.5.7) can be used to restrict validation to a subset of a document.
The optional when attribute (see 5.5.22) can be used to select the active phase based on the evaluation of its
expression.
Three strings, #ALL, #ANY and #DEFAULT, have special meanings when specifying active phases. The string
#ALL is reserved to denote that all patterns are active. The string #any denotes that the active phase is
selected using the method given in 5.5.22 and if no active phase is selected, then all patterns are active. The

string #DEFAULT is to denote that the name given in the default Phase attribute on the schema element should
be used. If no defaultPhase is specified, then all patterns are active.
The icon, see and fpi attributes (5.5.9, 5.5.17 and 5.5.8) allow rich interfaces and documentation.
The strings #ALL, #ANY and #DEFAULT shall not be used as phase names in a Schematron schema. They are for
use when invoking or configuring schema validation, for example, as a command-line parameter.

#### 5.4.14 report element

The report element specifies an assertion made about the context nodes. The data content is a natural-
language assertion. The required test attribute is an assertion test evaluated in the current context. If the
test evaluates positive, the report succeeds. The optional diagnostics attribute is a reference to further
diagnostic information. The optional properties attribute is a reference to additional arbitrary properties.
The natural-language assertion shall be a positive statement of a found pattern or a negative statement of a
constraint.
The icon, see and fpi attributes (5.5.9, 5.5.17 and 5.5.8) allow rich interfaces and documentation.
The flag attribute (5.5.6) allows more detailed outcomes.
The role and subject attributes (5.5.14 and 5.5.19) allow explicit identification of some part of a pattern.
The optional severity attribute (5.5.16) expresses the relative importance of an assertion.
The natural-language assertion may contain information about actual values in addition to expected
values and may contain diagnostic information. Users should note, however, that the diagnostic element is
provided for such information to encourage clear statement of the natural-language assertion.

#### 5.4.15 rule element

The rule element provides a list of assertions tested within the context specified by the context attribute.
The context attribute, required unless the rule element has the attribute abstract with a value true,
specifies the rule-context expression.
The optional visit-each attribute (see 5.5.21) refines the evaluation context.

The icon, see and fpi attributes (5.5.9, 5.5.17 and 5.5.8) allow rich interfaces and documentation.
The flag attribute (5.5.6) allows more detailed outcomes.
The role and subject attributes (5.5.14 and 5.5.19) allow explicit identification of some part of a pattern as
part of the validation outcome.
When the rule element has the attribute abstract with a value true, then the rule is an abstract rule. An
abstract rule shall not have a context attribute. An abstract rule is a list of assertions that will be invoked by
other rules, using the extends element. Abstract rules provide a mechanism for reducing schema size.
Itis not an error if a rule never fires in a document. In order to test that a document always has some context,
a new pattern should be created from the context of the document, with an assertion requiring the element
or attribute.

#### 5.4.16 rules element

The rules element is a container for abstract rules, allowing their use across patterns.
This element may be used as a top-level element in a schema and can also be used ina library (5.4.8).

#### 5.4.17 schema element

The schema element is the top-level element of a Schematron schema.

The optional schemaVersion attribute gives the version of the schema. Its allowed values are not defined by
this document and its use is implementation-dependent.
The optional queryBinding attribute provides the short name of the query language binding in use. The
defaultPhase attribute may be used to indicate the phase to use in the absence of explicit user-supplied
information.

The icon, see and fpi attributes (5.5.9, 5.5.17 and 5.5.8) allow rich interfaces and documentation.

#### 5.4.18 value-of element

The value-of element finds or calculates values from the instance document to allow clearer assertions and
diagnostics. The required select attribute is an expression evaluated in the current context that returns a string.
Variable references in the select attribute are resolved in the scope of the current schema, phase, pattern
and rule.

### 5.5 Ancillary elements and attributes

#### 5.5.1 diagnostic element

The diagnostic element provides a natural-language message giving more specific details concerning a
failed assertion, such as found versus expected values and repair hints.

The variables in scope when evaluating assertion tests shall also be in scope when evaluating diagnostic
elements associated with the assertion.

NOTE1 Diagnostics in multiple languages can be supported by using a different diagnostic element for each
language, with the appropriate xm1 : lang language attribute, and referencing all the unique identifiers of the diagnostic
elements in the diagnostics attribute of the assertion. Annex G gives a simple example of a multi-lingual schema.
NOTE 2 Typical values for the role attribute on a diagnostic element can be warning, caution or note.

#### 5.5.2 diagnostics attribute

The diagnostics attribute associates an assert or report element with further diagnostic information (see 5.5.1).
5.5.3. diagnostics element

The diagnostics element provides a section containing individual diagnostic elements.

#### 5.5.4 dir element

The dir element provides a section of natural-language text with a direction specified by the value attribute.
The value itr indicates left-to-right text; the value rt1 indicates right-to-left text.

#### 5.5.5 emph element

The emph element encloses a portion of text that should be rendered with some emphasis.

#### 5.5.6 flag attribute

The flag attribute acts as a Boolean value with the initial value false. A flag is implicitly declared by an
assertion or rule having a f1ag attribute with that name. The value of a flag becomes true when an assertion
with that flag fails or a rule with that flag fires.
The purpose of flags is to convey state or severity information to a subsequent process.

If the value of a flag attribute given in a schema is a variable reference, its value shall be dynamically
evaluated. This mechanism is provided to enable the flag value to vary, for example according to the
selected phase and its in-scope variables.

#### 5.5.7 from attribute

The from attribute contains an expression which restricts the evaluation of patterns ina phase to the subset
of the document it selects.
The expression shall be evaluated in the context of the instance document root. The results become the
context against which rule context expressions are evaluated. Variables evaluated in the context of the
instance document root are not influenced by the presence of from and so are evaluated and scoped as usual.
This behaviour shall not apply to subordinate documents, that is those selected by the documents attribute
(see 5.4.12).

#### 5.5.8 fpi attribute

The fpi attribute contains a formal public identifier for the schema, phase or other element.

#### 5.5.9 icon attribute

The icon attribute contains the location of a graphics file containing some visible representation of the
severity, significance or other grouping of the associated element.

#### 5.5.10 p element

The p element represents a paragraph of natural language text containing maintainer and user information
about the parent element. The schema can nominate paragraphs that should be rendered in a distinct way,
keyed with the class attribute.

#### 5.5.11 properties attribute

The properties attribute associates an assert or report element with additional arbitrary properties (see
5.5.13).

#### 5.5.12 properties element

The properties element provides a section containing individual property elements.

#### 5.5.13 property element

The property element declares additional arbitrary properties that will be associated with failed assertions
and successful reports.

Properties are defined on assertions in order to associate assertion text with the property. A property of
an assert element typically should be information pertaining to validation. A property of a report element
typically should be information for document augmentation (post schema validation information set.)

The variables in scope when evaluating assertion tests shall also be in scope when evaluating property
elements associated with the assertion.

The optional scheme attribute should be an IRI or other public identifier which specifies the notation used
for the metadata value.

NOTE 1 #£#7The vnrovertyv element is suitable for linking assertions or renorts to actions. to additional metadata. to

datatyping, and to dynamically extracted text related to the subject. : ; :

NOTE2 Where the property value contains elements in a well-known namespace or where the scheme used is
otherwise obvious or unnecessary, the scheme attribute can be omitted. For example, ifthe property element contains
an ISO/IEC 19757-7 1 Character Repertoire Description Language schema, no scheme attribute is appropriate.
NOTE3 _ Properties do not participate in the validation of constraints.
For additional information on Schematron properties, see Annex O.

#### 5.5.14 role attribute

The role attribute is a name describing the function of the assertion or context node in the pattern. If the
assertion has a subject attribute, then the role labels the arc between the context node and any nodes which
match the path expression given by the subject attribute.
If the value of a role attribute given in a schema is a variable reference, its value shall be dynamically
evaluated. This mechanism is provided to enable the role value to vary, for example according to the
selected phase and its in-scope variables.


#### 5.5.15 schematronEdition attribute

The optional schemat ronEdition attribute is a statement of the version of Schematron the schema conforms to.
The value of this attribute where specified shall be 2025.
Schemas should specify this attribute.
Implementations shall report the value or the absence of this attribute at user option.

#### 5.5.16 severity attribute

The severity attribute is a name describing the relative importance of an assertion.
The following values are reserved for use and without further definition: fatal, error, warning, info.
If the value of a severity attribute given in a schema is a variable reference, its value shall be dynamically
evaluated. This mechanism is provided to enable the severity value to vary, for example according to the
selected phase and its in-scope variables.

#### 5.5.17 see attribute

The see attribute contains the URI [IRI] of external information of interest to maintainers and users of
the schema.

#### 5.5.18 span element

The span element encloses a portion of some paragraph that should be rendered in a distinct way, keyed
with the class attribute.

#### 5.5.19 subject attribute

The subject attribute contains a path allowing more precise identification of nodes in validation messages.
The path expression is evaluated in the context of the context node ofthe current rule. Ifno subject attribute
is specified, the current context node should be used.
NOTE The subject attribute is necessary because it is possible that the rule context has been selected for reasons
of convenience or performance, in association with the particular assertion tests. In such cases, the rule context is not
useful to users, and the nodes located by the subject attribute can be more useful. Similarly, it can be impossible to
determine from an assertion test which nodes the assertion test has tested. In such a case, the nodes located by the
subject attribute can be more useful.

#### 5.5.20 title element

The title element contains a summary of the purpose or role of the schema, pattern or rule for the purpose
of documentation or a rich user interface.

#### 5.5.21 visit-each attribute

The visit-each attribute contains an expression which selects a sequence of items for further evaluation.
The expression is evaluated against each item resulting from evaluation of the rule's context expression. If
this sequence is non-empty, it becomes the context against which assertions are evaluated, in place of the
rule's context. If itis empty, the rule is still considered to have fired.
Sample usage is shown as follows (with the fn prefix bound to the namespace URI http: //www.w3.org/2005/
xpath-functions):
```xml
<sch:rule context='para' visit-each='fn:analyze-string(., "foo")'>
<sch:report test='fn:match'>Found matching substring "foo" at index <sch:value-of
                  select='string-length(string-join(preceding-sibling::fn:*))+1'/> in para.</sch:report>
   </sch:rule>
```

#### 5.5.22 when attribute

The `when` attribute is an expression evaluated to a Boolean in the context of the instance document root. If the expression evaluates to `true()`, then its parent phase becomes active. The first such phase declared in schema document order shall be the active phase.

This behaviour shall not apply to subordinate documents, that is those selected by the `documents` attribute (see 5.4.12).

## 6 Semantics

### 6.1 Validation function

A general Schematron validator is a function returning "valid", "invalid" or "error". The function notionally performs two steps: transforming the schema into a minimal syntax, then testing the instance against the minimal syntax.

A Schematron validator is a function over the following:

- a query language binding;

- a schema document;

- an instance to be validated;

- external XML documents addressed using information in the instance or schema;

- a phase name, or `#ALL` if all patterns shall be active patterns, or `#ANY` if the active phase shall be selected dynamically by evaluating the `when` attribute, or `#DEFAULT` if the `defaultPhase` attribute on the `schema` element shall be used;

- a list of name-value pairs, if the schema uses external variables.

NOTE  This document does not constrain other information provided by an implementation nor other uses of Schematron schemas. However, it is the intent of this document to support implementations to provide rich, specific diagnostics customised with values that assist in detecting and rectifying problems.

### 6.2 Minimal syntax

To simplify the specification of semantics later, the following transformation steps are first applied to a schema, resulting in a schema in the minimal syntax.

- Resolve all inclusions by replacing the `include` element by the resource linked to.

- Resolve all abstract patterns by replacing parameter references with actual parameter values in all enclosed attributes that contain queries.

- Resolve all abstract rules in the schema by replacing the `extends` elements with the contents of the abstract rule identified.

- Negate all `report` elements into `assert` elements.

NOTE  In the case of an XPath-based query binding this negation can be achieved for simple cases by passing the expression to the `not()` function, whereby e.g. `<sch:report test="*">` would become `<sch:assert test="not(*)">`.

— Remove elements used for diagnostics and documentation.
The resulting minimal syntax is also a schema in the full syntax. The minimal syntax differs from the
complex syntax by not containing the following XPaths.
— //sch:include
— //sch:pattern[@abstract="true"]
— //sch:pattern[@is-a]
— //sch:rule[@abstract="true"]
— //sch:extends
— //sch:report
— //sch:diagnostics
— //sch:p
— //sch:title
— //sch:group[@abstract="true"]
— //sch:group[@is-a]
— //sch:rules

### 6.3 Processing model

This clause outlines the processing model an implementation may follow and the high-level SVRL structures
expected to be output, if the processor supports SVRL output. For details of how schema structures
correspond to SVRL structures, see Clause D.2. Regarding the order of evaluation, see 6.6.
Once the minimal syntax has been produced, an implementation first establishes the specified phase,
according to the rules in 5.4.13. The name of the phase is reported in SVRL /svr1:schematron-output /@phase.
The active patterns belonging to that phase are each then processed. Each pattern is reported as SVRL /
svrl:schematron-output/svrl:active-pattern.
Rule contexts within the pattern are evaluated in document order. The context for this evaluation is as
defined by the query language binding in force.

A rule within a pattern element fires unless the information items its context matches have already been
matched by a previous rule in the same pattern. This restriction does not apply to rules within a group
element by contrast, where a match is attempted regardless.
To demonstrate the behaviour of rules ina pattern element, given this document:
EXAMPLE1  <article><section role='foo'/></article>
and a pattern element containing these rules (numbered for clarity):
EXAMPLE 2 [1] <rule context="/article">...</rule>
[2] <rule context="/article/section[true()]">...</rule>
[3] <rule context="/article/section[@role='foo']">...</rule>
[4] <rule context="@role">...</rule>
— rule [1] fires because the information item selected by the context is present in the document instance

(in other words, it is matched) and there are no previous rules in the pattern;

- rule [2] fires because the information item is matched and has not been matched by a previous rule;

- rule [3] does not fire because the information item was matched by a previous rule (rule [2]);

- rule [4] fires because the information item has not been matched by a previous rule.

When a rule fires, it is reported as SVRL `/svrl:schematron-output/svrl:fired-rule`. Each assertion test the rule contains is then evaluated against each of the information items matched by the rule context. If the assertion test fails, it is reported as SVRL `/svrl:schematron-output/svrl:failed-assert` for an `assert` element and `/svrl:schematron-output/svrl:successful-report` for a `report` element.

The content of the assertion message is reported as `(svrl:failed-assert|svrl:successful-report)/svrl:text`. The context for evaluating elements `name` and `value-of` featuring as part of the message is the result of evaluating the first available attribute of the following sequence:

a) the assertion's `subject` attribute;

b) the containing `rule`'s `subject` attribute;

c) the containing `rule`'s `context` attribute.

### 6.4 Abstract pattern processing

Abstract patterns allow a common definition mechanism for structures which use different names and paths, but which are at heart the same. For example, there are different table markup languages, but they all can be in large part represented as an abstract pattern where a table contains rows and rows contain entries, as defined in the following example using the default query language binding:

```xml
<sch:pattern abstract="true" id="table">
  <sch:param name="table"/>
  <sch:param name="row"/>
  <sch:param name="entry"/>
  <sch:rule context="$table">
    <sch:assert test="$row"> The element <name/> is a table. Tables contain rows. </sch:assert>
  </sch:rule>
  <sch:rule context="$row">
    <sch:assert test="$entry"> The element <name/> is a table row. Rows contain entries. </sch:assert>
  </sch:rule>
</sch:pattern>
```

When a `pattern` element has the attribute `is-a` with a value specifying the name of an abstract pattern, then the pattern is an instance of an abstract pattern. Such a pattern shall not contain any `rule` elements, but shall have `param` elements for all parameters used in the abstract pattern.

The following example uses the abstract pattern for tables given above to create three patterns for tables with different names or structures.

```xml
<sch:pattern is-a="table" id="HTML_Table">
  <sch:param name="table" value="table"/>
  <sch:param name="row" value="tr"/>
  <sch:param name="entry" value="td|th"/>
</sch:pattern>

<sch:pattern is-a="table" id="CALS_Table">
  <sch:param name="table" value="table"/>
  <sch:param name="row" value=".//row"/>
  <sch:param name="entry" value="entry"/>
</sch:pattern>

<sch:pattern is-a="table" id="calendar">
  <sch:param name="table" value="calendar/year"/>
  <sch:param name="row" value="week"/>
  <sch:param name="entry" value="day"/>
</sch:pattern>
```

When creating an instance of an abstract pattern, the parameter values supplied by the `param` element replace the parameter references used in the abstract patterns. The examples above use the default query language binding in which the character `$` is used as the delimiter for parameter references.

Thus, given the abstract patterns defined earlier in this clause, the patterns defined above are equivalent to the following, with the `id` elements shown expanded:

```xml
<sch:pattern id="HTML_table">
  <sch:rule context="table">
    <sch:assert test="tr"> The element table is a table. Tables containing rows. </sch:assert>
  </sch:rule>
  <sch:rule context="tr">
    <sch:assert test="td|th"> The element tr is a table row. Rows contain entries. </sch:assert>
  </sch:rule>
</sch:pattern>
<sch:pattern id="CALS_table">
  <sch:rule context="table">
    <sch:assert test=".//row"> The element table is a table. Tables containing rows. </sch:assert>
  </sch:rule>
  <sch:rule context="row">
    <sch:assert test="entry"> The element row is a table row. Rows contain entries. </sch:assert>
  </sch:rule>
</sch:pattern>
<sch:pattern id="calendar">
  <sch:rule context="calendar/year">
    <sch:assert test="week"> The element year is a table. Tables containing rows. </sch:assert>
  </sch:rule>
  <sch:rule context="week">
    <sch:assert test="day"> The element week is a table row. Rows contain entries. </sch:assert>
  </sch:rule>
</sch:pattern>
```

### 6.5 Query language binding

A query language binding shall provide the following:

- the general query language used; a name token which identifies the query language; the data model;

- the rule-context query language; the rule-context scope;

- the assertion test, a function which returns a data value coercible into Boolean.

A query language binding may also provide the following:

- the data models of the various query languages, the conversion between data models, and the treatment of information items: which information items are stripped or ignored, which information items are errors, and which information items are used;

- the `name` query language, a function which returns a data value coercible into a string;

- the `value-of` query language, a function which returns a data value coercible into a string;

A, I, I
— the let value query language, a function which returns a data value;
— the documents selecting query language, a function which returns a data value interpretable as a list or

sequence of IRIs;
— the variable delimiter convention, a lexical convention such as a delimiter by which the use of a variable

ina query expression shall be recognized;
— the abstract pattern parameter convention, a lexical convention such as a delimiter by which the

parameters of abstract patterns inside query expressions shall be recognised.
The query language binding may also specify the element types in other namespaces which provide query-
language-specific ancillary information or pragmatic hints.
The query language binding shall specify any whitespace processing required on queries.
The query language binding shall specify any restrictions to the value of name tokens.
A Schematron implementation which does not support the query language binding, specified in a schema
with the queryBinding attribute, shall fail with an error.
The following query language names are reserved without further definition. Implementations which use
different query language bindings are encouraged to use one of these names if appropriate: stx, xslt, exslt,
xslt2, xslt3, xslt4, xpath, xpath2, xpath3, xpath31, xpath4, xquery, xquery3, xquery31, xquery4. Any mix of
upper case and lower case letters in these names is permitted.
The default query language binding is xsit, which shall be in accordance with Annex C. The queryBinding
attribute is optional. If it is not specified, the default query language binding shall take effect. For design
requirements for Schematron schemas using the default query language binding, see Annex E.
The query language bindings for XSLT2, XPath2, XSLT3, XPath3, XPath31, XQuery3 and XQuery31 shall be in
accordance with Annex H, Annex I, Annex J, Annex K, Annex L, Annex M and Annex N respectively.

### 6.6 Order and side-effects

The order in which elements are validated is implementation-dependent, without altering the validity of the
instance.
The order in which patterns are used is implementation-dependent, without altering the validity of the
instance.
The order in which assertions are tested is implementation-dependent, without altering the validity of the
instance.

The only elements for which order is significant are the rule element in the context of a pattern, and the let
element.
A rule element acts as an if-then-else statement within each pattern. In the context of a group element
(5.4.5), this behaviour shall not apply and a match shall be attempted instead against all the rule contexts
it contains. An implementation may make order non-significant by converting rules context expressions to
elaborated rule-context expressions.
A let element may use lexically previous variables within the same rule or global variables.
All queries shall act as pure functions. Queries shall not alter the instance in any way visible to other queries.
This document does not specify any outcome augmentation of the instance being validated.
NOTE The behaviour of the rule element within a pattern allows constraints that would require a complex
context expression to be factored into simpler expressions in different rules.

### 6.7 Localization and language fixup

An implementation shall perform language fixup according to the method defined in section 4.5.6 of XInclude
1.0 when incorporating external definitions (via elements include and extends) and instantiating abstract
patterns, abstract rules, diagnostics, and properties.

### 6.8 Base URI fixup

An implementation shall perform base URI fixup according to the method defined in section 4.5.5 of XInclude
1.0 when incorporating external definitions (via elements include and extends).

## 7 Conformance

### 7.1 Simple conformance

Asimple-conformance implementation shall be able to report for any XML document that it does not conform
to the constraints expressed by a given Schematron schema.
— A Schematron schema shall conform to the constraints of Annex A, the ISO/IEC 19757-2 (RELAX NG
Compact Syntax) schema.
— ASchematron schema shall conform to the constraints of Annex B.
A simple-conformance implementation shall be able to determine for any XML document and for any
Schematron schema whether the document is valid with respect to the schema.
Where the query language allows incorrectness to be established, implementations should report this
information as part of the validation.
NOTE1 It is not a requirement of this document that a simple-conformance implementation be able to determine
whether validation will terminate or whether the queries are feasible against some other schema for the instance. The
ability to determine these depends on the query language used.
NOTE2 It is not a requirement of this document that a simple-conformance implementation be able to generate
validation reports in the Schematron Validation Report Language, defined in Annex D.

### 7.2 Full conformance

A full-conformance implementation shall be able to determine for any XML document whether it is a
correct schema.
— A Schematron schema shall conform to the constraints of Annex A, the ISO/IEC 19757-2 (RELAX NG
Compact Syntax) schema.
— ASchematron schema shall conform to the constraints of Annex B.
— A Schematron schema's attributes shall conform to the grammars specified by the query language
binding in use.
— A Schematron schema shall have one definition only in scope for any global variable name in the global
context and any local variable name in the local context.
— The values of the attributes flag, id, name and prefix shall be well-formed names in the version of XML
being used.
A full-conformance implementation shall be able to determine for any XML document and for any correct
schema whether the document is valid with respect to the schema.
Where the query language allows incorrectness to be established, implementations should report this
information as part of the validation.
NOTE1 It is not a requirement of this document that a full-conformance implementation be able to determine

The ability to determine these depends on the query language used.
NOTE2 It is not a requirement of this document that a full-conformance implementation be able to generate
validation reports in the Schematron Validation Report Language, defined in Annex D.

## Annex A
*(normative)*

### RELAX NG schema for Schematron

A correct Schematron schema shall be valid with respect to the following ISO/IEC 19757-2 (RELAX NG Compact Syntax) schema.

```
# Copyright © ISO/IEC 2024
# The following permission notice and disclaimer shall be included in all
# copies of this XML schema ("the Schema"), and derivations of the Schema
#
# Permission is hereby granted, free of charge in perpetuity, to any
# person obtaining a copy of the Schema, to use, copy, modify, merge and
# distribute free of charge, copies of the Schema for the purposes of
# developing, implementing, installing and using software based on the
# Schema, and to permit persons to whom the Schema is furnished to do so,
# subject to the following conditions:
#
# THE SCHEMA IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
# IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
# FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
# THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
# OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
# ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SCHEMA OR THE USE OR
# OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SCHEMA.
#
# In addition, any modified copy of the Schema shall include the following
# notice:
#
# "THIS SCHEMA HAS BEEN MODIFIED FROM THE SCHEMA DEFINED IN ISO/IEC 19757-3,
# AND SHOULD NOT BE INTERPRETED AS COMPLYING WITH THAT STANDARD".

namespace local = ""
default namespace sch = "http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron"

chart = schema | include

# Element declarations
schema =
    element schema {
        attribute id { xsd:ID }?,
        rich,
        attribute schemaVersion { non-empty-string }?,
        attribute schematronEdition { non-empty-string }?,
        attribute defaultPhase { xsd:IDREF }?,
        attribute queryBinding { non-empty-string }?,
        (foreign
        & (inclusion | extends)*
        & (title?, ns*, p*, param*, let*, phase*, abstract-rules*, (rule-set|pattern)+, p*,
diagnostics?, properties?))
    }
active =
    element active {
        attribute pattern { xsd:IDREF },
        (foreign & (text | dir | emph | span)*)
    }
assert =
    element assert {
        attribute test { exprValue },
        attribute flag { flagValue }?,
        attribute id { xsd:ID }?,
        attribute diagnostics { xsd:IDREFS }?,
        attribute properties { xsd:IDREFS }?,
        rich,
        linkable,
        severity,
        message
    }
diagnostic =
    element diagnostic {
        attribute id { xsd:ID },
        attribute role { roleValue }?,
        rich,
        message
    }
diagnostics = element diagnostics { foreign & inclusion* & diagnostic* }
dir =
    element dir {
        attribute value { "ltr" | "rtl" }?,
        (foreign & (text | dynamic)*)
    }
emph = element emph { (foreign & (text | dynamic)*) }
extends =
    element extends {
        (attribute rule { xsd:IDREF }
        | attribute href { uriValue }),
        foreign-empty
    }
let =
    element let {
        attribute name { nameValue },
        attribute as { text }?,
        (attribute value { string }
        | foreign-element+)
    }
library =
    element library {
        attribute id { xsd:ID }?,
        rich,
        (foreign
        & (inclusion | extends)*
        & (title?, p*, param*, let*, abstract-rules*, (rule-set|pattern)*, p*, diagnostics?,
properties?))
    }
name =
    element name {
        attribute path { pathValue }?,
        foreign-empty
    }
ns =
    element ns {
        attribute uri { uriValue },
        attribute prefix { nameValue },
        foreign-empty
    }
p =
    element p {
        attribute id { xsd:ID }?,
        attribute class { classValue }?,
        attribute icon { uriValue }?,
        (foreign & (text | dir | emph | span)*)
    }
param =
    element param {
        attribute name { nameValue },
        attribute value { non-empty-string }?
    }
pattern =
    element pattern {
        rule-set-or-pattern
    }
phase =
    element phase {
        attribute id { xsd:ID },
        attribute from { pathValue }?,
        attribute when { pathValue }?,
        rich,
        (foreign & inclusion* & (p*, let*, active*))
    }
properties = element properties { property* }
property =
    element property {
        attribute id { xsd:ID },
        attribute role { roleValue }?,
        attribute scheme { text }?,
        message
    }
report =
    element report {
        attribute test { exprValue },
        attribute flag { flagValue }?,
        attribute id { xsd:ID }?,
        attribute diagnostics { xsd:IDREFS }?,
        attribute properties { xsd:IDREFS }?,
        rich,
        linkable,
        severity,
        message
    }
rule =
    element rule {
        attribute flag { flagValue }?,
        rich,
        linkable,
        (foreign
        & inclusion*
        & ((attribute context { pathValue },
            attribute visit-each { non-empty-string }?,
            attribute id { xsd:ID }?,
            attribute abstract { "false" }?,
            title?,
            let*,
            (assert | report | extends | p)+)))
    }
abstract-rule =
    element rule {
        attribute flag { flagValue }?,
        rich,
        linkable,
        (foreign
        & inclusion*
        & (attribute abstract { "true" },
            attribute id { xsd:ID },
            title?,
            let*,
            (assert | report | extends | p)+))
    }
abstract-rules =
    element rules {
        attribute id { xsd:ID }?,
        rich,
        title?,
        p*,
        abstract-rule+
    }
rule-set =
    element group {
        rule-set-or-pattern
    }
span =
    element span {
        attribute class { classValue },
        (foreign & (text | dynamic)*)
    }
title = element title { (text | dir)* }
value-of =
    element value-of {
        attribute select { pathValue },
        foreign-empty
    }

# common declarations
inclusion =
    element include {
        attribute href { uriValue },
        foreign-empty
    }
rich =
    attribute icon { uriValue }?,
    attribute see { uriValue }?,
    attribute fpi { fpiValue }?,
    attribute xml:lang { langValue }?,
    attribute xml:space { "preserve" | "default" }?
linkable =
    attribute role { roleValue }?,
    attribute subject { pathValue }?
foreign = foreign-attributes, foreign-element*
foreign-empty = foreign-attributes
foreign-attributes = attribute * - (local:* | xml:*) { text }*
foreign-element =
    element * - sch:* {
        (attribute * { text }
        | foreign-element
        | schema
        | text)*
    }
rule-set-or-pattern =
    attribute documents { pathValue }?,
    attribute role { roleValue }?,
    rich,
    (foreign
    & inclusion*
    & ((attribute abstract { "true" },
        attribute id { xsd:ID },
        title?,
        (p*, param*, let*, rule*))
    | (attribute abstract { "false" }?,
        attribute id { xsd:ID }?,
        title?,
        (p*, let*, rule*))
    | (attribute abstract { xsd:NMTOKEN },
        attribute is-a { xsd:IDREF },
        attribute id { xsd:ID }?,
        title?,
        (p*, param*))))
severity = attribute severity{ text }?
dynamic = value-of | name
message = (foreign & (text | dynamic | emph | dir | span)*)

# Data types
uriValue = xsd:anyURI
pathValue = string
exprValue = string
fpiValue = string
langValue = xsd:language
roleValue = string
flagValue = list{ token+ }
nameValue = string

# In the default query language binding, xsd:NCName
classValue = string
non-empty-string = xsd:token { minLength = "1" }
```

## Annex B
*(normative)*

### Schematron schema for additional constraints

```xml
<!--
© ISO/IEC 2024
The following permission notice and disclaimer shall be included in all
copies of this XML schema ("the Schema"), and derivations of the Schema
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge in perpetuity, to any
person obtaining a copy of the Schema, to use, copy, modify, merge and
distribute free of charge, copies of the Schema for the purposes of
developing, implementing, installing and using software based on the
Schema, and to permit persons to whom the Schema is furnished to do so,
subject to the following conditions:
THE SCHEMA IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SCHEMA OR THE USE OR
OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SCHEMA.
In addition, any modified copy of the Schema shall include the following
notice:
THIS SCHEMA HAS BEEN MODIFIED FROM THE SCHEMA DEFINED IN ISO/IEC 19757-3,
AND SHOULD NOT BE INTERPRETED AS COMPLYING WITH THAT STANDARD."
-->

<sch:schema xmlns:sch="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron" xml:lang="en"
queryBinding="xslt2"
    xmlns:xsl="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform">
    <xsl:key name="abstract-pattern" match="sch:pattern[@abstract='true']" use="@id"/>
    <sch:title>Auxiliary Validation Constraints in Schematron</sch:title>
    <sch:ns prefix="sch" uri="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron"/>
    <sch:p>This schema supplies some constraints in addition to those given in the
      ISO/IEC 19757-2
      (RELAX NG Compact Syntax) Schema for Schematron.</sch:p>
    <sch:pattern>
        <sch:rule context="sch:active">
            <sch:assert test="//sch:pattern[@id=current()/@pattern]" id="active-patterns"> The
pattern
                attribute of the active element shall match the id
                attribute of a pattern.</sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="sch:extends">
            <sch:assert test="//sch:rule[@abstract='true'][@id=current()/@rule]" id="abstract-
rules"> The rule
                attribute of an extends element shall match the id
                attribute of an abstract rule.
            </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="sch:let">
            <sch:assert id="param-variable-clash"
                test="not(/sch:schema//sch:param[@name=current()/@name])">
                [@abstract='true']/sch:param[@name=current()/@name]
                : A variable name and an abstract pattern parameter should not use the
                same name.
            </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="sch:param">
            <sch:assert test="not(../sch:param except current()[@name=current()/@name])"
                id="param-name">A parameter name should not use the same name as a parameter
in the same scope.</sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
    </sch:pattern>
    <sch:pattern context="sch:pattern[@is-a]">
        <sch:assert test="key('abstract-pattern', @is-a)" id="abstract-patterns"> The
            is-a attribute of a pattern element shall match
            the id attribute of an abstract pattern.
        </sch:assert>
        <sch:assert test="every $name in current()/sch:param/@name
            satisfies $name eq key('abstract-pattern', @is-a)/sch:param/@name" id="param-
names-match"> The
            name attribute of a pattern param element shall match
            the name attribute of an abstract pattern param element.
        </sch:assert>
    </sch:rule>
    <sch:rule context="sch:pattern[@is-a]/sch:param">
        <sch:assert test="@value or key('abstract-pattern', ../@is-a)/sch:param/@value"
id="missing-param-value">A pattern parameter value shall be specified.</sch:assert>
    </sch:rule>
    <sch:rule context="sch:schema/sch:param">
        <sch:assert test="@value" id="schema-param-value">A schema parameter value shall
be specified.</sch:assert>
    </sch:rule>
</sch:schema>
```

## Annex C
*(normative)*

### Default query language binding

A Schematron schema with no query language binding or a `queryBinding` attribute with the value `xslt`, in any mix of upper and lower case letters, shall use the following definitions.

— The query language used shall be the extended version of XPath specified in XSLT1. Consequently, the data model used shall be the data model of those specifications.

— The rule context shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XSLT1. The rule context may be root nodes, elements, attributes, comments and processing instructions. An implementation may allow the rule context to be text nodes at user option however implementations may reject or fail to implement schemas which specify text nodes.

— The assertion test shall be interpreted according to Production 14 of XPath, as returning a Boolean value.

— The name query shall be interpreted according to Production 14 of XPath, as returning a string value. Typically, the `path` attribute contains an expression returning an element node: the name query takes the local or prefixed name of the node, not its value.

— The value-of query shall be interpreted according to Production 14 of XPath, as returning a string value.

— The let value shall be interpreted according to Production 14 of XPath, as returning a string value.

— The `document` attribute of the `pattern` element shall be interpreted according to Production 14 of XPath, as returning one or more IRI strings that are evaluated using the `document()` function.

— The notation for signifying the use of parameter of an abstract pattern shall prefix the parameter name token with the character `$`. This is a character not found as a delimiter in URLs or XPaths. The character `$` not followed by the name of an in-scope parameter shall not be treated as a parameter name delimiter. Such a character may subsequently be used as a delimiter for a variable name or as a literal character.

— A Schematron let expression shall be treated as an XSLT1 variable. The XSLT1 `$` delimiter signifies the use of a variables in a context expression, assertion test, name query, value-of query or let expression. The character `$` not followed by the name of an in-scope variable shall be treated as a literal character. The `as` attribute shall be ignored in this query language binding.

The XSLT1 elements import and include may be used, in the XSLT1 namespace, before the `pattern` elements.

The XSLT1 `key` element may be used, in the XSLT1 namespace, before the `pattern` elements.

The XSLT1 `copy-of` element may be used, in the XSLT1 namespace and without child nodes, inside the `property` element.

Schematron value templates may be used to dynamically evaluate the value of attributes `flag`, `role` and `severity`.

The attributes `id`, `name` and `prefix` should follow the rules for non-colonized names for the version of XML used by the document.

## Annex D
*(informative)*

### Schematron Validation Report Language

#### D.1 Description

The Schematron Validation Report Language (SVRL) is a simple XML language which may be used for reporting the results of Schematron validation and for conformance suites.

The order of elements in an SVRL report is implementation-dependent; different implementations may generate the same elements in a different order.

All elements shown in the grammar for Schematron Validation Report Language are qualified with the namespace URI:

http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/svrl

Elements related to the same subordinate document should be grouped together. In subsequent schemas, the prefix `svrl` is taken as bound to the Schematron Validation Report Language namespace URI for exposition purposes. The prefix `svrl` is not reserved or required by this document.

#### D.2 Mapping of Schematron structures to SVRL

**Table D.1 — SVRL mapping**

| Schematron | SVRL |
|---|---|
|  sch:schema | svrl:schematron-output  |
|  sch:schema/@defaultPhase | svrl:schematron-output/@phase<sup>a</sup>  |
|  sch:schema/@id | *none*  |
|  sch:schema/@queryBinding | *none*  |
|  sch:schema/@schemaVersion | svrl:schematron-output/@schemaVersion  |
|  sch:schema/@schemaFrontVersion | svrl:schematron-output/@schemaFrontVersion  |
|  sch:schema/sch:diagnostics/sch:diagnostic | svrl:schematron-output/(svrl:failed-assert/svrl:successful-report)/svrl:diagnostic-reference<sup>b</sup>  |
|  sch:schema/sch:diagnostics/sch:diagnostic/@id | svrl:schematron-output/(svrl:failed-assert/svrl:successful-report)/svrl:diagnostic-reference/@diagnostic  |
|  sch:schema/sch:group/@documents | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:active-pattern/@documents  |
|  sch:schema/sch:group/@id | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:active-pattern/@id  |
|  sch:schema/sch:group/@role | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:active-pattern/@role  |
|  sch:schema/(sch:group/sch:pattern)/sch:rule/@context | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:fired-rule/@context  |
|  *none* | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:fired-rule/@document<sup>c</sup>  |
|  sch:schema/(sch:group/sch:pattern)/sch:rule/@flag | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:fired-rule/@flag  |
|  sch:schema/(sch:group/sch:pattern)/sch:rule/@id | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:fired-rule/@id  |
|  sch:schema/(sch:group/sch:pattern)/sch:rule/@role | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:fired-rule/@role  |
|  sch:schema/(sch:group/sch:pattern)/sch:rule/(@flag\|sch:assert)/@flag | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:failed-assert/@flag  |
|  sch:schema/(sch:group/sch:pattern)/sch:rule/(@assert\|sch:assert)/@id | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:failed-assert/@id  |
|  sch:schema/(sch:group/sch:pattern)/sch:rule/(@assert\|sch:assert)/@role | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:failed-assert/@role  |
|  sch:schema/(sch:group/sch:pattern)/sch:rule/(@assert\|sch:assert)/@severity | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:failed-assert/@severity  |
|  sch:schema/(sch:group/sch:pattern)/sch:rule/(@assert\|sch:assert)/(@subject\|.../@subject,.../@context[1]) | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:failed-assert/@location<sup>d</sup>  |
|  sch:schema/(sch:group/sch:pattern)/sch:rule/(@assert\|sch:assert)/@test | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:failed-assert/@test  |
|  sch:schema/(sch:group/sch:pattern)/sch:rule/(@report\|sch:report)/@flag | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:successful-report/@flag  |
|  sch:schema/(sch:group/sch:pattern)/sch:rule/(@report\|sch:report)/@id | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:successful-report/@id  |
|  sch:schema/(sch:group/sch:pattern)/sch:rule/(@report\|sch:report)/@role | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:successful-report/@role  |
|  sch:schema/(sch:group/sch:pattern)/sch:rule/(@report\|sch:report)/(@subject\|.../@subject,.../@context[1]) | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:successful-report/@location<sup>d</sup>  |
|  sch:schema/(sch:group/sch:pattern)/sch:rule/(@report\|sch:report)/@test | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:successful-report/@test  |
|  sch:schema/(sch:group/sch:pattern)/sch:rule/@subtitle | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:fired-rule/@name  |
|  sch:schema/sch:group/sch:title | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:active-group/@name  |
|  sch:schema/sch:ns/@prefix | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:ns-prefix-in-attribute-values/@prefix  |
|  sch:schema/sch:ns/@uri | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:ns-prefix-in-attribute-values/@uri  |
|  sch:schema/sch:p | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:text  |
|  sch:schema/sch:p/@icon | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:text/@icon  |
|  sch:schema/sch:p/(@id, @class) | *none*  |
|  sch:schema/sch:pattern/@documents | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:active-pattern/@documents  |
|  sch:schema/sch:pattern/@id | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:active-pattern/@id  |
|  sch:schema/sch:pattern/@role | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:active-pattern/@role  |
|  sch:schema/sch:pattern/sch:title | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:active-pattern/@name  |
|  sch:schema/sch:properties/sch:property | svrl:schematron-output/(svrl:failed-assert/svrl:successful-report)/svrl:property-reference<sup>e</sup>  |
|  sch:schema/sch:properties/sch:property/@id | svrl:schematron-output/(svrl:failed-assert/svrl:successful-report)/svrl:property-reference/@property  |
|  sch:schema/sch:properties/sch:property/@role | svrl:schematron-output/(svrl:failed-assert/svrl:successful-report)/svrl:property-reference/@role  |
|  sch:schema/sch:properties/sch:property/@scheme | svrl:schematron-output/(svrl:failed-assert/svrl:successful-report)/svrl:property-reference/@scheme  |
|  sch:schema/sch:title | svrl:schematron-output/@title  |
|  **Generic elements and attributes** |  |
|  sch:dir | svrl:dir  |
|  sch:dir/@value | svrl:dir/@dir  |
|  *none* | svrl:dir/@xml:lang  |
|  sch:emph | svrl:emph  |
|  sch:name | *substituted by string value resulting from name, or name of node identified by @path, if present*  |
|  sch:span/@class | svrl:span/@class  |
|  sch:value-of/@select | *substituted by string value resulting from evaluating the expression*  |
|  (sch:pattern\|sch:rule\|sch:phase)/sch:p | *none*  |
|  (* except (self::sch:pattern, self::sch:phase, self::sch:rule))/@fpi | svrl:text/@fpi  |
|  (* except (self::sch:pattern, self::sch:phase, self::sch:rule))/@icon | svrl:text/@icon  |
|  (* except (self::sch:pattern, self::sch:phase, self::sch:rule))/@see | svrl:text/@see  |
|  (* except (self::sch:pattern, self::sch:phase, self::sch:rule))/@xml:lang | svrl:text/@xml:lang  |
|  (* except (self::sch:pattern, self::sch:phase, self::sch:rule))/@xml:space | svrl:text/@xml:space  |
|  *foreign elements and attributes, and sch:schema*<sup>f</sup> | *all copied verbatim*  |
|  *errors occurring while evaluating* pattern/@documents | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:active-pattern/@documents/svrl:error  |
|  *dynamic errors occurring during evaluation (e.g. unavailability of referenced resources; query language syntax errors; etc.)* | svrl:schematron-output/svrl:error  |
|  *optional error code associated with the error* | svrl:error/@code  |
|  *URI [IRI] of the document where the error was encountered* | svrl:error/@document  |
|  *location (e.g. XPath or line number etc) of the error within the document* | svrl:error/@location  |

<sup>a</sup> *Or name of the active phase, for example as passed to the implementation by user command (see [5.4.13](#)).*

<sup>b</sup> *Only output where referenced by the corresponding (sch:assert|sch:report)/@diagnostics.*

<sup>c</sup> *The base URI [IRI] of the document where the rule fired, as derived by evaluating the parent pattern/@documents attribute (see [5.4.12](#)).*

<sup>d</sup> *Evaluate the assertion subject attribute if present, otherwise the parent rule's subject attribute, falling back to the rule's context attribute if neither is present.*

<sup>e</sup> *Only output where referenced by the corresponding (sch:assert|sch:report)/@properties.*

<sup>f</sup> *Applies to sch:schema only in the specific context of the content model declared by foreign-element (see [Annex A](#)).*

#### D.3 RELAX NG compact syntax schema

```
# Copyright © ISO/IEC 2024
#
# The following permission notice and disclaimer shall be included in all
# copies of this XML schema ("The Schema"), and derivations of the Schema:
# Permission is hereby granted, free of charge in perpetuity, to any
# person obtaining a copy of the Schema, to use, copy, modify, merge and
# distribute free of charge, copies of the Schema for the purposes of
# developing, implementing, installing and using software based on the
# Schema, and to permit persons to whom the Schema is furnished to do so,
# subject to the following conditions:
#
# THE SCHEMA IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
# IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
# FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
# THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
# OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
# ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SCHEMA OR THE USE OR
# OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SCHEMA.
#
# In addition, any modified copy of the Schema shall include the following
# notice:
#
# THIS SCHEMA HAS BEEN MODIFIED FROM THE SCHEMA DEFINED IN ISO/IEC 19757-3,
# AND SHOULD NOT BE INTERPRETED AS COMPLYING WITH THAT STANDARD."

namespace local = ""
default namespace svrl = "http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/svrl"

schematron-output =
    element schematron-output {
        attribute title { text }?,
        attribute phase { xsd:NMTOKEN }?,
        attribute schemaVersion { text }?,
        attribute schemaFrontEdition { text }?,
        (
          (error*, human-text*)
          |
          (error*,
          human-text*,
          ns-prefix-in-attribute-values*,
          (active-pattern+,rule-set,
            (fired-rule, (failed-assert | successful-report)*)*)*
          )
        }
# only namespaces from schins need to be reported
ns-prefix-in-attribute-values =
    element ns-prefix-in-attribute-values {
        attribute prefix { xsd:NMTOKEN },
        attribute uri { text },
        empty
    }
# only active patterns and groups are reported
active-pattern =
    element active-pattern {
        active
    }
active-rule-set =
    element active-group {
        active
    }
# only rules that are fired are reported,
fired-rule =
    element fired-rule {
        attribute id { xsd:NCName }?,
        attribute name { text }?,
        attribute context { text },
        attribute visit-each { text }?,
        attribute role { string }?,
        attribute flag { list{ token+ } }?,
        attribute document { xsd:anyURI }?,
        empty
    }
# only references are reported, not the diagnostic
diagnostic-reference =
    element diagnostic-reference {
        attribute diagnostic { xsd:NMTOKEN },
        attribute role { text }?,
        human-text
    }
# only failed assertions are reported
failed-assert =
    element failed-assert {
        assertion-message
    }
# only successful asserts are reported
successful-report =
    element successful-report {
        assertion-message
    }
# property-reference
property-reference =
    element property-reference {
        attribute property { xsd:NMTOKEN },
        attribute role { text }?,
        attribute scheme { text }?,
        human-text
    }
# errors raised by the implementation
error =
    element error {
        attribute document { xsd:anyURI }?,
        attribute location { text },
        attribute code { text }?,
        rich-text
    }
# human text
human-text =
    element text {
        attribute xml:space { text }?,
        attribute xml:lang { text }?,
        attribute see { text }?,
        attribute icon { text }?,
        attribute fpi { text }?,
        rich-text
    }
# rich text
rich-text = (foreign | dir | span | emph | text)*
# directionality
dir =
    element dir {
        attribute class { text }?,
        attribute dir { text }?,
        text
    }
# emphasis
emph =
    element emph {
        attribute class { text }?,
        text
    }
# arbitrary markup
span =
    element span {
        attribute class { text },
        text
    }
# foreign
foreign = foreign-attributes | foreign-element
foreign-attributes = attribute * - (xml:* | local:*) { text }*
foreign-element =
    element * - svrl:* {
        (attribute * { text }
         | foreign-element
         | text)*
    }
attlist.assert-and-report =
    attribute id { xsd:NCName }?,
    attribute location { text },
    attribute test { text },
    attribute role { string }?,
    attribute flag { list{ token+ } }?,
    attribute severity { string }?

# active patterns and rule-sets
active-pattern-rule-set =
    active-pattern | active-rule-set
active =
    attribute id { xsd:NCName }?,
    attribute documents { xsd:anyURI }?,
    attribute name { text }?,
    attribute role { string }?,
    error*

# assert and report message
assertion-message =
    attlist.assert-and-report, diagnostic-reference*, property-reference*, human-text

start = schematron-output
```

#### D.4 Schematron Schema

The corresponding Schematron schema is:

```xml
<!--
Copyright © ISO/IEC 2024

The following permission notice and disclaimer shall be included in all
copies of this XML schema ("The Schema"), and derivations of the Schema:
Permission is hereby granted, free of charge in perpetuity, to any person obtaining a
copy of the Schema, to use, copy, modify, merge and
distribute free of charge, copies of the Schema for the purposes of
developing, implementing, installing and using software based on the
Schema, and to permit persons to whom the Schema is furnished to do so,
subject to the following conditions:

THE SCHEMA IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY,
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL
THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE,
ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SCHEMA OR THE USE OR
OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SCHEMA.

In addition, any modified copy of the Schema shall include the following
notice:

THIS SCHEMA HAS BEEN MODIFIED FROM THE SCHEMA DEFINED IN ISO/IEC 19757-3,
AND SHOULD NOT BE INTERPRETED AS COMPLYING WITH THAT STANDARD."
-->

<sch:schema xmlns:sch="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron" xml:lang="en">
    <sch:title>Schema for Schematron Validation Report Language</sch:title>
    <sch:ns prefix="svrl" uri="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/svrl"/>
    <sch:p>The Schematron Validation Report Language is a simple language for
        implementations to use to compare their conformance. It is
        basically a list of all the assertions that fail when validating
        a document, in any order, together with other information such as
        which rules fire. </sch:p>
    <sch:p>This schema can be used to validate SVRL documents, and provides examples
        of the use of abstract rules and abstract patterns.</sch:p>
    <sch:pattern>
        <sch:title>Elements</sch:title>
        <!--Abstract Rules -->
        <sch:rule abstract="true" id="second-level">
            <sch:assert test="../svrl:schematron-output"> The <sch:name/> element is a
                child of schematron-output. </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule abstract="true" id="childless">
            <sch:assert test="count(*)=0"> The <sch:name/> element should not contain
                any elements.
            </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule abstract="true" id="empty">
            <sch:extends rule="childless"/>
            <sch:assert test="string-length(normalize-space(.)) = 0"> The <sch:name/>
                element should be empty.</sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <!-- Rules-->
        <sch:rule context="svrl:schematron-output">
            <sch:assert test="not(../*)"> The <sch:name/> element is the root element.
            </sch:assert>
            <sch:assert
                test="count(svrl:text) + count(svrl:ns-prefix-in-attribute-values) +
count(svrl:active-pattern) + count(svrl:fired-rule) + count(svrl:failed-assert) +
count(svrl:successful-report) + count(*)">
                <sch:name/> may only contain the following elements: text,
ns-prefix-in-attribute-values, active-pattern, fired-rule, failed-assert and
successful-report. </sch:assert>
            <sch:assert test="svrl:active-pattern">
                <sch:name/> should have at least one active pattern. </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="svrl:diagnostic-reference">
            <sch:extends rule="childless"/>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="svrl:diagnostic-reference">
            <sch:assert test="string-length(@diagnostic) &gt; 0">
                <sch:name/> should have a diagnostic attribute, giving the id of
                the diagnostic.
            </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="svrl:ns-prefix-in-attribute-values">
            <sch:extends rule="second-level"/>
            <sch:extends rule="empty"/>
            <sch:report
                test="following-sibling::svrl:active-pattern
                  or following-sibling::svrl:ns-prefix-in-attribute-value"
                > A <sch:name/> comes after an active-pattern or another
ns-prefix-in-attribute-values element. </sch:report>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="svrl:active-pattern">
            <sch:extends rule="second-level"/>
            <sch:extends rule="empty"/>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="svrl:fired-rule">
            <sch:extends rule="second-level"/>
            <sch:extends rule="empty"/>
            <sch:report
                test="preceding-sibling::svrl:active-pattern |
                  preceding-sibling::svrl:fired-rule |
                  preceding-sibling::svrl:failed-assert |
                  preceding-sibling::svrl:successful-report"
                > A <sch:name/> comes after an active-pattern, an empty fired-rule,
                a failed-assert or a successful report. </sch:report>
            <sch:assert test="string-length(@context) &gt; 0"> The <sch:name/> element
                should have a context attribute giving the current
                context, in simple XPath format. </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
        <sch:rule context="svrl:failed-assert | svrl:successful-report">
            <sch:extends rule="second-level"/>
            <sch:assert test="count(svrl:diagnostic-reference) + count(svrl:text) =
                  count(*)"> The <sch:name/> element should only contain a
                text element and diagnostic reference elements. </sch:assert>
            <sch:assert test="count(svrl:text) = 1"> The <sch:name/> element should only
                contain a text element. </sch:assert>
            <sch:assert
                test="preceding-sibling::svrl:fired-rule |
                  preceding-sibling::svrl:failed-assert |
                  preceding-sibling::svrl:successful-report"
                > A <sch:name/> comes after a fired-rule, a failed-assert or a successful-
                report. </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
    </sch:pattern>
    <sch:pattern>
        <sch:title>Unique Ids</sch:title>
        <sch:rule context="*[@id]">
            <sch:assert test="not(preceding::*[@id=current()/@id])"> Id attributes
                should be unique in a document. </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
    </sch:pattern>
    <sch:pattern abstract="true" id="requiredAttribute">
        <sch:title>Required Attributes</sch:title>
        <sch:rule context="$context">
            <sch:assert test="string-length(@$attribute) &gt; 0"> The <sch:name/> element
                should have a <sch:value-of select="$attribute"/> attribute.
            </sch:assert>
        </sch:rule>
    </sch:pattern>
    <sch:pattern is-a="requiredAttribute">
        <sch:param name="context" value="svrl:diagnostic-reference"/>
        <sch:param name="attribute" value="@diagnostic"/>
    </sch:pattern>
    <sch:pattern is-a="requiredAttribute">
        <sch:param name="context" value="svrl:failed-assert | svrl:successful-report"/>
        <sch:param name="attribute" value="@location"/>
    </sch:pattern>
    <sch:pattern is-a="requiredAttribute">
        <sch:param name="context" value="svrl:failed-assert | svrl:successful-report"/>
        <sch:param name="attribute" value="@test"/>
    </sch:pattern>
    <sch:pattern is-a="requiredAttribute">
        <sch:param name="context" value="svrl:ns-prefix-in-attribute-values"/>
        <sch:param name="attribute" value="@prefix"/>
    </sch:pattern>
    <sch:pattern is-a="requiredAttribute">
        <sch:param name="context" value="svrl:ns-prefix-in-attribute-values"/>
        <sch:param name="attribute" value="@prefix"/>
    </sch:pattern>
</sch:schema>
```

## Annex E
*(informative)*

### Design requirements

Motivating design requirements for the schema language with the default query language binding include the following:

- represent abstract patterns such as the *head*+*body* pattern;
- support progressive validation of compound documents; a compound document is a notional instance document which has been divided into the original instance and a number of subordinate well-formed XML documents; these subordinate documents may also contain schema-like information;
- include assertions or abstract rules from an external file;
- support a one-to-one mapping between the natural-language statements and artificial-language statements;
- support the generation and labelling of arcs between information items.

Motivating design requirements for the schema language with the default query language binding do not include the following.

- simple specification of constraints that are simply expressed by grammar-based validation, such as ISO/IEC 19757-2 (RELAX NG) schemas;
- replacement of any other standard schema language for XML;
- single-pass or streamable implementation.

Certain outcomes are out-of-scope for this document:

- specification of a type system;
- generation of links between multiple occurrences of some datum across multiple documents for the purpose of consistency-checking.

Motivating requirements for the changes introduced in this document include the following:

- support more query language bindings, in particular XSLT3.

## Annex F
*(informative)*

### Use of Schematron as a vocabulary

The following Schematron element types may be used as vocabulary elements by other standards and schemas. The semantics of element types used externally should follow this document:

- `schema`;
- `pattern`;
- `rule`;
- `assert`;
- `report`.

These elements should use the standard Schematron namespace specified in 5.2.

## Annex G
*(informative)*

### Use of Schematron for multi-lingual schemas

The following Schematron schema shows how multiple languages may be supported.

```xml
<sch:schema xmlns:sch="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron" xml:lang="en">
   <sch:title>Example of Multi-Lingual Schema</sch:title>
   <sch:pattern>
      <sch:rule context="dog">
         <sch:assert test="bone" diagnostics="d1 d2"> A dog should have a bone.
            </sch:assert>
      </sch:rule>
   </sch:pattern>
   <sch:diagnostics>
      <sch:diagnostic id="d1" xml:lang="en"> A dog should have a bone. </sch:diagnostic>
      <sch:diagnostic id="d2" xml:lang="de"> Ein Hund sollte ein Bein haben. </sch:diagnostic>
   </sch:diagnostics>
</sch:schema>
```

## Annex H
*(normative)*

### Query language binding for XSLT2

The `xslt2` query language binding allows schemas implemented using XSLT2. All implementations that support the `xslt2` query language binding should also support `xpath2` query language binding.

A Schematron schema with a `queryBinding` attribute with the value `xslt2`, in any mix of upper and lower case letters, shall use the following binding.

- The query language used shall be the extended version of XPath2 specified in XSLT2 with backwards compatibility mode as false. Consequently, the data model used shall be the data model of XDM[12] constructed from an infoset or a PSVI. All namespaces, prefixes, functions and operators defined by XPath2Functions shall be available. An implementation may allow user-written functions and extensions, in the appropriate namespace.
- The rule context shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XSLT2. The rule context may be root nodes, elements, attributes, comments and processing instructions, including sequences of these. An implementation may allow the rule context to be text nodes at user option however implementations may reject or fail to implement schemas which specify text nodes.
- The assertion test shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2, using `fn:Boolean()` on the result of evaluating the expression and to find the effective Boolean value.
- The `name` query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2, using `fn:node-name()` on the result of evaluating the expression which should be an element or attribute node and returning a string value.
- The `value-of` query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2, using `fn:string()` on the result of evaluating the expression and returning a string value.
- The `let` value shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2.
- The `documents` attribute of the element shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2, as returning a sequence of strings that are evaluated using the `document()` function.
- The notation for signifying the use of a parameter of an abstract pattern shall prefix the parameter name token with the character `$`. This is a character not found as a delimiter in URLs or XPaths. The character `$` not followed by the name of an in-scope parameter shall not be treated as a parameter name delimiter. Such a character may subsequently be used as a delimiter for a variable name or as a literal character.
- A Schematron `let` expression shall be treated as an XSLT2 variable. The XSLT2 `:` delimiter signifies the use of a variable in a context expression, assertion test, `name` query, `value-of` query or let expression. The character `$` not followed by the name of an in-scope variable shall be treated as a literal character. If the `as` attribute is specified, the variable's datatype shall be determined using the rules relating to attribute `as` in XSLT 2 of XSLT2.
- All namespaces and prefixes defined by XSLT2 for modules shall be reserved with their XSLT2 usage. All functions defined by these modules shall be available in addition to the functions defined by XPath2Functions.

The XSLT2 elements `import` and `include` may be used, in the XSLT2 namespace, before the `pattern` elements.

The XSLT2 element `import-schema` may be used, in the XSLT2 namespace, before the `pattern` element.

The XSLT2 `key` element may be used, in the XSLT2 namespace, before the `pattern` elements.

The XSLT2 `function` element may be used, in the XSLT2 namespace, before the `pattern` elements.

The XSLT2 `copy-of` element may be used, in the XSLT2 namespace and without child nodes, inside the `property` element.

Attribute value templates may be used to dynamically evaluate the value of attributes `flag`, `role` and `severity`.

The attributes `id`, `name` and `prefix` should follow the rules for non-colonized names for the version of XML used by the document.

The `fn:error()` function or other dynamic errors should not be used to provide assertion text or to substitute for assertions and diagnostics.

## Annex I
*(normative)*

### Query language binding for XPath2

The `xpath2` query language binding allows schemas implemented using XPath2.

A Schematron schema with a `queryBinding` attribute with the value `xpath2`, in any mix of upper and lower case letters, shall use the following binding.

- By default the query language used shall be that of XPath2 used with no XSD[13] schema and with backwards compatibility mode as false. Consequently, the data model used shall be the data model of XDM constructed from an infoset not a post schema validation infoset. All namespaces, prefixes, functions and operators defined by XPath2Functions shall be available. No user-written functions or extensions shall be available.
- The rule context shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2. The rule context may be elements, attributes, comments and processing instructions, including sequences of these.
- The assertion test shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2, using `fn:boolean()` on the result of evaluating the expression and to find the effective Boolean value.
- The `name` query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2, using `fn:node-name()` on the result of evaluating the expression which should be an element or attribute node and returning a string value.
- The `value-of` query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath2, using `fn:string()` on the result of evaluating the expression and returning a string value.
- The `let` element should not be used.

The attributes `id`, `name` and `prefix` should follow the rules for non-colonized names for the version of XML used by the document.

The `fn:error()` function or other dynamic errors should not be used to provide assertion text or to substitute for assertions and diagnostics.

## Annex J
*(normative)*

### Query language binding for XSLT3

The `xslt3` query language binding allows schemas implemented using XSLT3. All implementations that support the `xslt3` query language binding should also support `xpath3` query language binding.

A Schematron schema with a `queryBinding` attribute with the value `xslt3`, in any mix of upper and lower case letters, shall use the following binding.

- The query language used shall be the extended version of XPath3 specified in XSLT3 with backwards compatibility mode as false. Consequently, the data model used shall be the data model of XDM constructed from an infoset or a PSVI. All namespaces, prefixes, functions and operators defined by XPath3Functions shall be available. An implementation may allow user-written functions and extensions, in the appropriate namespace.
- The rule context shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XSLT3. The rule context may be root nodes, elements, attributes, comments and processing instructions, including sequences of these. An implementation may allow the rule context to be text nodes at user option however implementations may reject or fail to implement schemas which specify text nodes.
- The assertion test shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, using `fn:boolean()` on the result of evaluating the expression and to find the effective Boolean value.
- The `name` query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, using `fn:node-name()` on the result of evaluating the expression and returning a string value.
- The `value-of` query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, using `fn:string()` on the result of evaluating the expression and returning a string value.
- The `let` value shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3.
- The `documents` attribute of the element shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, as returning a sequence of strings that are evaluated using the `document()` function.
- The notation for signifying the use of a parameter of an abstract pattern shall prefix the parameter name token with the character `$`. This is a character not found as a delimiter in URLs or XPaths. The character `$` not followed by the name of an in-scope parameter shall not be treated as a parameter name delimiter. Such a character may subsequently be used as a delimiter for a variable name or as a literal character.
- A Schematron `let` expression shall be treated as an XQuery3 variable. The XSLT3 `:` delimiter signifies the use of a variable in a context expression, assertion test, `name` query, `value-of` query or `let` expression. The character `$` not followed by the name of an in-scope variable shall be treated as a literal character. If the `as` attribute is specified, the variable's datatype shall be determined using the rules relating to attribute `as` in section 9.1 of XSLT3.
- All namespaces and prefixes defined by XSLT3 for modules shall be reserved with their XSLT3 usage. All functions defined by these modules shall be available in addition to the functions defined by XPath3Functions.

The XSLT3 elements `import`, `include`, and `use-package` may be used, in the XSLT3 namespace, before the `pattern` elements.

The XSLT3 element `import-schema` may be used, in the XSLT3 namespace, before the `pattern` elements.

The XSLT3 element `accumulator` may be used, in the XSLT3 namespace, before the `pattern` elements.

The XSLT3 `key` element may be used, in the XSLT3 namespace, before the `pattern` elements.

The XSLT3 `function` element may be used, in the XSLT3 namespace, before the `pattern` elements.

The XSLT3 `copy-of` element may be used, in the XSLT3 namespace and without child nodes, inside the `property` element.

Text value templates may be used to dynamically construct user-defined messages. The extent to which this method is supported is implementation-defined.

Attribute value templates may be used to dynamically evaluate the value of attributes `flag`, `role` and `severity`.

The attributes `id`, `name` and `prefix` should follow the rules for non-colonized names for the version of XML used by the document.

The `fn:error()` function or other dynamic errors should not be used to provide assertion text or to substitute for assertions and diagnostics.

## Annex K
*(normative)*

### Query language binding for XPath3

The `xpath3` query language binding allows schemas implemented using XPath3.

A Schematron schema with a `queryBinding` attribute with the value `xpath3`, in any mix of upper and lower case letters, shall use the following binding.

- By default the query language used shall be that of XPath3 used with no XSD[13] schema and with backwards compatibility mode as false. Consequently, the data model used shall be the data model of XDM constructed from an infoset not a post schema validation infoset. All namespaces, prefixes, functions and operators defined by XPath3Functions shall be available. No user-written functions or extensions shall be available.
- The rule context shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3. The rule context may be

elements, attributes, comments and processing instructions, including sequences of these.
- The assertion test shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, using `fn:boolean()` on the result of evaluating the expression and to find the effective Boolean value.
- The `name` query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, using `fn:node-name()` on the result of evaluating the expression which should be an element or attribute node and returning a string value.
- The `value-of` query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, using `fn:string()` on the result of evaluating the expression and returning a string value.
- The `let` element should not be used.

The attributes `id`, `name` and `prefix` should follow the rules for non-colonized names for the version of XML used by the document.

The `fn:error()` function or other dynamic errors should not be used to provide assertion text or to substitute for assertions and diagnostics.

## Annex L
*(normative)*

### Query language binding for XPath31

The `xpath31` query language binding allows schemas implemented using XPath31.

A Schematron schema with a `queryBinding` attribute with the value `xpath31`, in any mix of upper and lower case letters, shall use the following binding.

- By default the query language used shall be that of XPath31 used with no XSD[13] schema and with backwards compatibility mode as false. Consequently, the data model used shall be the data model of XDM constructed from an infoset not a post schema validation infoset. All namespaces, prefixes, functions and operators defined by XPath31 Functions shall be available. No user-written functions or extensions shall be available.
- The rule context shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath31. The rule context may be

elements, attributes, comments and processing instructions, including sequences of these.
- The assertion test shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath31, using `fn:boolean()` on the result of evaluating the expression and to find the effective Boolean value.
- The `name` query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath31, using `fn:node-name()` on the result of evaluating the expression which should be an element or attribute node and returning a string value.
- The `value-of` query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath31, using `fn:string()` on the result of evaluating the expression and returning a string value.
- The `let` element should not be used.

The attributes `id`, `name` and `prefix` should follow the rules for non-colonized names for the version of XML used by the document.

The `fn:error()` function or other dynamic errors should not be used to provide assertion text or to substitute for assertions and diagnostics.

## Annex M
*(normative)*

### Query language binding for XQuery3

The `xquery3` query language binding allows schemas implemented using XQuery3. All implementations that support the `xquery3` query language binding should also support `xpath3` query language binding.

A Schematron schema with a `queryBinding` attribute with the value `xquery3`, in any mix of upper and lower case letters, shall use the following binding.

- The query language used shall be XQuery3. The data model used shall be the data model of XDM constructed from an infoset or a PSVI. All namespaces, prefixes, functions and operators defined by XPath3Functions shall be available. An implementation may allow user-written functions and extensions, in the appropriate namespace. The method of doing so is implementation-defined.
- The initial context item shall be the root of the document instance. Implementations may provide the

facility to provide the initial context item. This mechanism is implementation-defined.
- The rule context shall be evaluated relative to the initial context item. The rule context may be root nodes, elements, attributes, comments, processing instructions and text nodes, including sequences of these.
- The assertion test shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, using `fn:boolean()` on the result of evaluating the expression and to find the effective Boolean value.
- The `name` query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, using `fn:node-name()` on the result of evaluating the expression which should be an element or attribute node and returning a string value.
- The `value-of` query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, using `fn:string()` on the result of evaluating the expression and returning a string value.
- The `let` value shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3.
- The `documents` attribute of the element shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath3, as returning a sequence of strings that are evaluated using the `document()` function.
- The notation for signifying the use of a parameter of an abstract pattern shall prefix the parameter name token with the character `$`. This is a character not found as a delimiter in URLs or XPaths. The character `$` not followed by the name of an in-scope parameter shall not be treated as a parameter name delimiter. Such a character may subsequently be used as a delimiter for a variable name or as a literal character.
- A Schematron `let` expression shall be treated as an XQuery3 variable. The XQuery3 `:` delimiter signifies the use of a variable in a context expression, assertion test, `name` query, `value-of` query or `let` expression. The character `$` not followed by the name of an in-scope variable shall be treated as a literal character. If the `as` attribute is specified, the variable's datatype shall be interpreted according to Production 167 of XQuery3.
- All namespaces and prefixes defined by XQuery3 for modules shall be reserved with their XQuery3 usage. All functions defined by these modules shall be available in addition to the functions defined by XPath3Functions.

The declarations, options and other instructions such as imports defined in section 4 of XQuery3 may be used as needed in a schema with this query language binding. The method of including these is implementation-defined. Namespaces used in context expressions, assertion tests and other query expressions shall still be defined by element `ns` (see 5.4.18).

The attributes `id`, `name` and `prefix` should follow the rules for non-colonized names for the version of XML used by the document.

The `fn:error()` function or other dynamic errors should not be used to provide assertion text or to substitute for assertions and diagnostics.

## Annex N
*(normative)*

### Query language binding for XQuery31

The `xquery31` query language binding allows schemas implemented using XQuery31. All implementations that support the `xquery31` query language binding should also support `xpath31` query language binding.

A Schematron schema with a `queryBinding` attribute with the value `xquery31`, in any mix of upper and lower case letters, shall use the following binding.

- The query language used shall be XQuery31. The data model used shall be the data model of XDM constructed from an infoset or a PSVI. All namespaces, prefixes, functions and operators defined by XPath3Functions shall be available. An implementation may allow user-written functions and extensions, in the appropriate namespace. The method of doing so is implementation-defined.

- The initial context item shall be the root of the document instance. Implementations may provide the

facility to provide the initial context item. This mechanism is implementation-defined.

- The rule context shall be evaluated relative to the initial context item. The rule context may be root nodes, elements, attributes, comments, processing instructions and text nodes, including sequences of these.

- The assertion test shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath31, using `fn:boolean()` on the result of evaluating the expression and to find the effective Boolean value.

- The `name` query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath31, using `fn:node-name()` on the result of evaluating the expression which should be an element or attribute node and returning a string value.

- The `value-of` query shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath31, using `fn:string()` on the result of evaluating the expression and returning a string value.

- The `let` value shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath31.

- The `documents` attribute of the element shall be interpreted according to Production 1 of XPath31, as returning a sequence of strings that are evaluated using the `document()` function.

- The notation for signifying the use of a parameter of an abstract pattern shall prefix the parameter name token with the character `$`. This is a character not found as a delimiter in URLs or XPaths. The character `$` not followed by the name of an in-scope parameter shall not be treated as a parameter name delimiter. Such a character may subsequently be used as a delimiter for a variable name or as a literal character.

- A Schematron `let` expression shall be treated as an XQuery31 variable. The XQuery31 `:` delimiter signifies the use of a variable in a context expression, assertion test, `name` query, `value-of` query or `let` expression. The character `$` not followed by the name of an in-scope variable shall be treated as a literal character. If the `as` attribute is specified, the variable's datatype shall be interpreted according to Production 183 of XQuery31.

- All namespaces and prefixes defined by XQuery31 for modules shall be reserved with their XQuery31 usage. All functions defined by these modules shall be available in addition to the functions defined by XPath3Functions.

The declarations, options and other instructions such as imports defined in section 4 of XQuery31 may be used as needed in a schema with this query language binding. The method of including these is implementation-defined. Namespaces used in context expressions, assertion tests and other query expressions shall still be defined by element `ns` (see [5.4.10](#)).

The attributes `id`, `name` and `prefix` should follow the rules for non-colonized names for the version of XML used by the document.

The `fn:error()` function or other dynamic errors should not be used to provide assertion text or to substitute for assertions and diagnostics.

## Annex O
*(informative)*

### Example usage of Schematron properties

#### O.1 Running example

In the following examples, the `property` elements given should be placed inside the `properties` element in the document below. It gives examples of properties usable by a validation application on an `assert` element and properties usable for information set augmentation on a `report` element.

```xml
<sch:schema ...>
  <sch:title>Example schema of annotation with</sch:title>
  <sch:pattern>
    <sch:rule context="assetValue">
      <sch:assert test="true()" properties="precision3 non-negative-decimal iso8859-1">
      The element assetValue should be a non-negative decimal number, with three
      digits of precision, in Australian dollars.
      </sch:assert>
      <sch:report test="true()"
      properties="australianDollar precision3a thisElement thisValue ">
      The element assetValue should be a non-negative decimal number, with three digits
      of precision, in Australian dollars.
      </sch:report>
    </sch:rule>
  </sch:pattern>
  <sch:properties>...</sch:properties>
</sch:schema>
```

In the examples given in [Clause O.2](#) to [Clause O.9](#), the values of the `role` attributes are neither defined nor reserved by this document.

#### O.2 Annotation with controlled vocabulary information

```xml
<sch:property id="australianDollar" scheme="ISO 4217" role="currency">AUD</sch:property>
```

#### O.3 Annotation with static information

```xml
<sch:property id="precision3" role="precision" >3</sch:property>
```

#### O.4 Annotation with static structured information

```xml
<sch:property id="precision3a" >
  <precision>3</precision>
</sch:property>
```

#### O.5 Type annotation with XSD Simple Type

```xml
<sch:property id="non-negative-decimal" >
<xsd:simpleType type="xsd:decimal">
<xsd:maxInclusive value="0" />
<xsd:fractionDigits value="2"/>
</xsd:simpleType>
</sch:property>
```

#### O.6 Type annotation with dynamic information

```xml
<sch:property id="thisValue" role="value"><sch:value-of select="." /></sch:property>
```

#### O.7 Type annotation with dynamic structured information

This can be used to draw in elements as well as values from the instance.

```xml
<sch:property id="thisElement" role="contents">
  <xslt:copy-of select="."
     xmlns:xslt="http://www.w3.org/1999/XSL/Transform"/>
</sch:property>
```

#### O.8 Annotation with ISO/IEC 19757-7 character repertoire reference

```xml
<sch:property id="iso8859-1" role="repertoire">  <repertoire xmlns="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/crepdl/ns/structure/2.0"
registry="IANA" number="111"/>
</sch:property>
```

#### O.9 SVRL document

Let the instance be the single element which conforms to the properties above.

```xml
<assetValue>1000.00</assetValue>
```

The following is an SVRL document which transfers the properties from the `report` element.

```xml
<svrl:schematron-output xmlns:svrl="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/svrl">
    <svrl:active-pattern />
    <svrl:fired-rule context="assetValue" />
    <svrl:successful-report test="false()" location="/assetValue">
        <svrl:property-reference property="australianDollar" scheme="ISO 4217" role="currency">
            <svrl:text>AUD</svrl:text>
        </svrl:property-reference>
        <svrl:property-reference property="precision3a">
            <svrl:text><precision>3</precision></svrl:text>
        </svrl:property-reference>
        <svrl:property-reference property="thisValue" role="value">
            <svrl:text>1000.00</svrl:text>
        </svrl:property-reference>
        <svrl:property-reference property="thisElement" role="contents">
            <svrl:text><assetValue>1000.00</assetValue></svrl:text>
        </svrl:property-reference>
        <svrl:text>The element assetValue should be a non-negative decimal number, with three
digits of precision, in Australian dollars.</svrl:text>
    </svrl:successful-report>
</svrl:schematron-output>
```

## Bibliography

1. ISO/IEC 19757-3:2020, *Information technology - Document Schema Definition Languages (DSDL) - Part 3: Rule-based validation using Schematron*
2. ISO/IEC 19757 (all parts), *Information technology — Document Schema Definition Languages (DSDL)*
3. Extensible Markup Language (XML) 1.0 (Fifth Edition), W3C Recommendation, 26 November 2008, https://www.w3.org/TR/2008/REC-xml-20081126/
4. ISO 8879, *Information processing — Text and office systems — Standard Generalized Markup Language (SGML)*
5. ISO/IEC 19757-2, *Information technology — Document Schema Definition Language (DSDL) — Part 2: Regular-grammar-based validation — RELAX NG*
6. Resource Description for Schematron (web page), Rick Jelliffe, Computing Centre, Academia Sinica, Taipei, http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron
7. XML Constraint Specification Language, José Carlos Leite Ramalho, Department of Informatics, School of Engineering, University of Minho, http://www.di.uminho.pt/~jcr/PROJS/xcsl-www/
8. XML Infoset, XML Information Set (Second Edition), W3C Recommendation 4 February 2004, https://www.w3.org/TR/2004/REC-xml-infoset-20040204/
9. RFC 3987, IETF Request for Comment (IRIs), Current version, http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3987
10. XML 1.0 Namespaces, Namespaces in XML 1.0 (Third Edition), W3C Recommendation 8 December 2009, http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/REC-xml-names-20091208/

11. ISO/IEC 19757-7, *Information technology — Document Schema Definition Languages (DSDL) — Part 7: Character Repertoire Description Language (CREPDL)*
12. XQuery 1.0 and XPath 2.0 Data Model (XDM), W3C Recommendation, 14 December 2010, https://www.w3.org/TR/2010/REC-xpath-datamodel-20101214/
13. XML Schema Part 1: Structures Second Edition, W3C Recommendation, 28 October 2004, http://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-1/

